Answered Prayers 
Self-Realization Fellowship International Headquarters, 
Los Angeles, California, October 19, 1939 
Having come to this world from we know not where, we 
naturally wonder about the origin and purpose of life. We hear 
about a Creator, read about Him, but know not any way to con-
tact Him. We only know that the entire universe depicts His 
intelligence. Just as the intricate works of a tiny watch arouse 
our admiration for the watchmaker, and the huge complicated 
machines in a factory cause us to marvel at their inventor, so 
when we see nature's wonders we feel awed by the  hidden 
intelligence behind them. We ask ourselves: Who made the 
flower a living form, reaching out to the sun? Whence came its 
fragrance and beauty? How were its petals formed so perfectly, 
and tinged with lovely colours? 
At night the stars and the moon, shedding silvery light 
around us, move us to reflection on the intelligence guiding 
these celestial bodies through the sky. The moon's soft light is 
insufficient for the activities of the day; thus a benign intelli-
gence suggests to us that we rest at night. Then the sun comes 
up, and its bright light makes us look clearly and squarely at 
the world around us, and at our responsibility to satisfy  the 
needs that beset us. 
There are two ways in which our needs can be taken care 
of. One is the material. For example, when we have ill health 
we can go to a doctor for medical treatment. But a time comes 
when no human aid can help. Then we look to the other way, 
to the Spiritual Power, the Maker of our body, mind, and soul. 
Material power is limited, and when it fails, we turn to the 
unlimited Divine Power. Likewise with our financial  needs; 
when we have done our best, and still it is inadequate, we turn 
to that other Power. 
32 

ANSWERED  PRAYERS  33 
Everyone thinks that his problems are the worst. Some feel 
more oppressed than others because their resistance is weaker. 
Because of differences in their mental power, people put forth 
varying amounts of energy. If one has a very great difficulty 
and his mind is weak, he will not succeed in overcoming the 
problem. A man whose mind is powerful could break down 
the barriers of that difficulty. Even so, the mightiest men have 
sometimes met failure. When overwhelming material, mental, 
or spiritual troubles beset us, we realize how limited are the 
powers of life in this physical world. 
Our endeavour must be not only to acquire financial secu-
rity and good health, but to seek out the meaning of life. What 
is it all about? When we are hit with difficulties we react upon 
our environment first, making whatever material adjustments 
we believe may help. But when we come to the point of saying, 
"Everything I have tried so far has failed; what to do next?" we 
start to think hard about a solution. When we think  deeply 
enough, we find an answer within. This is one form of answered 
prayer. 
Prayer Is a Demand of the Soul 
Prayer is a demand of the soul. God did not make us beg-
gars; He created us in His image. The Bible and Hindu scrip-
tures declare it. A beggar who goes to a rich home and asks for 
alms receives a beggar's share,- but the son can have anything 
he asks from his wealthy father. Therefore  we should  not 
behave like beggars. Divine ones such as Krishna, Christ, and 
Buddha did not lie when they said we are made in the image 
of God. 
Yet we see that some people have everything,  seemingly 
born with a silver spoon in their mouth, whereas others seem 
to attract failure and troubles. Where is the image of God in 
them? The power of Spirit lies within each one of us the ques-
;
tion is how to develop it. If you will follow the lesson in my 
experiences with God, you are bound to find the result you are 
seeking. In the past you may have been disappointed that your 
prayers were not answered. But do not lose faith. In order to 
find out if prayers work or not, you must have in your mind 
an initial belief in the power of prayer. 

34  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
Your prayers  may have  gone unanswered  because  you 
chose to be a beggar. Also, you should know what you may 
legitimately ask of your Heavenly Father. You may pray with all 
your heat and power to own the earth, but your prayer will not 
be granted, because all prayers connected with material life are 
limited; they have to be. God will not break His laws to satisfy 
whimsical desires. But there is a right way to pray. The cat is 
said to have nine lives,- difficulties have ninety-nine! You have 
to find the one sure way of killing the cat of difficulties.  The 
,i secret of effective prayer is to change your status from beggar 
| to child of God; when you appeal to Him from that conscious-
ness, your prayer will have both power and wisdom. 
In Will Power Lies the Germ of Success 
Most people become extremely nervous or tense  when 
i they are trying to accomplish something that means a great 
j  deal to them. Anxious, nervous actions do not draw the power 
I of God; but continuous, calm, powerful use of the will shakes 
the forces of creation and brings a response from the Infinite. 
The germ of success in whatever you want to accomplish  is 
in your will power. Will that has been badly battered by diffi-
culties becomes temporarily paralyzed. The resolute man who 
says,  "My body may be broken, but my head of will power 
remains unbowed," demonstrates the greatest expression  of 
will. 
Will power is what makes you divine. When you give up 
using that will, you become a mortal man. Many people say 
we should not exercise our will to change conditions, lest we 
interfere with God's plan. But why would God give us will if 
we are not to use it? I once met a fanatical man who said he 
did not believe in using will power because it developed the 
ego. "You are using a lot of will now to resist me!" I replied. 
"You are using it to talk, and you are obliged to use your will 
to stand, or walk, or eat, or go to the movies, or even to go to 
sleep. You will everything you do. Without will power you 
would be a mechanical man." Non-use of the will is not what 
|  Jesus meant when he said: "Not as I will, but as Thou wilt."* 
He was demonstrating that man must learn to bend his will, 
* Matthew  26:39. 

ANSWERED  PRAYERS  35 
which is governed by desires, to the will of God. Therefore 
right prayer, when it is persistent, is will. 
You must believe in the possibility of what you are pray-
ing for. If you want a home, and the mind says, "You simple-
ton,  you  can't  afford a house,"  you  must  make  your  will 
stronger. When the "can't" disappears from your mind, divine 
power comes. A home will not be dropped down to you from 
heaven,-  you  have  to  pour  forth  will  power  continuously 
through constructive actions. When you persist, refusing to ac-
cept failure, the object of will must materialize. When you con-
tinuously work that will through your thoughts and activities, 
what you are wishing for has to come about. Even though there 
is nothing in the world to conform to your wish, when your 
will persists, the desired result will somehow manifest. In that 
kind of will lies God's answer; because will comes from God, 
and continuous will is divine will. 
Cauterize the "Can'ts" in Your Brain 
A weak will is a mortal will. As soon as trials and failure 
cut it off, it loses is connection with the dynamo of the Infi-
nite. But behind human will is the divine will that can never 
fail. Even death has no power to deter divine will. The Lord 
will definitely answer that prayer behind which the will force 
is continuous. Most people are mentally or physically lazy, or 
both. When they want to pray, they think instead of sleep, and 
when the head nods they dive into bed and that is the end of 
prayer.  The  will  is  buried.  Mortal  man's  brain  is  full  of 
"can'ts." Being born in a family with certain  characteristics 
and habits, he is influenced by these to think he can't do cer-
tain things,- he can't walk much, he can't eat this, he can't 
stand that. Those "can'ts" have to be cauterized. You have 
within you the power to accomplish everything you want; that 
power lies in the will. 
Whoever would develop will power must have good com-
pany. If your desire is to become a great mathematician, and 
your customary associates all dislike mathematics, you will 
certainly be discouraged. But when you mix with accomplished 
mathematicians, your will is reinforced; you think, "If others 
can do it, I can do it." 
Don't immediately jump into big things in your eagerness 

36  MAN'S ETERNAL QUEST 
to develop your will. To succeed, first try out your will on some 
little thing you thought you could not do. If you work hard at 
it, you can be successful. I remember all the goals my friends 
and many others told me I could never accomplish, but I did. 
Such "well-wishers" can do much harm. God save us from their 
kind! Company has the greatest influence on will. If instead of 
coming here, you went to a drinking party every Thursday, you 
could not help but pick up something of that worldly vibration. 
Your will is definitely inspired or weakened by your company. 
To develop will by yourself is extremely difficult. You require 
an example before you. If you would be an artist, surround your-
self with good paintings and artists. If you would be a divine 
man, surround yourself with spiritual company. 
Belief and experience are quite different. A belief comes 
from what you have heard or read and accepted as fact, but 
experience  is something you have actually perceived.  The 
convictions of those who have experienced God cannot be 
shaken. If you had never tasted an orange, I could fool you 
about its characteristics,- but if you had already eaten one, I 
could not deceive you. You would know; you would have had 
the experience of it. 
Seek the Company of Those Who Strengthen Your Faith 
Thoughts about God, success, healing, and so on lie in your 
brain in the form of tabloid tendencies. You should experience 
them. In order to experience your thoughts you must use will 
power to materialize them, and in order to develop the neces-
sary strength of will, you must associate with those who have 
great will power. If you want healing by God's power, seek the 
company of those who strengthen your faith and your will. 
I travelled throughout India trying to find someone who 
knew God. Such souls are rare. All the teachers I met told me 
about their beliefs. But in spiritual matters I was determined 
never to be satisfied with words about God. I wanted to expe-
rience Him. What I am told has no meaning for me unless I 
experience it. 
Once I was talking with a friend of mine, a broker, about 
the saints of India. He did not share my enthusiasm. "All these 
so-called saints are fakes," he said. "They don't know God." 

ANSWERED  PRAYERS  37 
I didn't argue; I changed the subject, and we started to talk 
about the brokerage business. When he had told me quite a 
great deal about it, I said smoothly, "Do you know there is not 
a single reliable broker in Calcutta? They are all dishonest." 
"What do you know about brokers?" he retorted angrily. 
"Exactly," I replied. "What do you know about saints?" He 
couldn't answer. "Don't dispute what you don't know about," 
I went on good-naturedly. "I know nothing about the broker-
age business, and you don't know anything about saints." 
The practice of religion has come to a point where very few 
try to make their spiritual thoughts a matter of experience. I 
speak to you only about my experiences,-1 do not care to lecture 
on what I know only intellectually. Most persons become self-
satisfied about what they have read of Truth, without ever hav-
ing experienced it. In India we do not seek spiritual guidance 
from someone just because he has a theological degree, nor do 
we seek out those who have only studied the scriptures, with-
out experiencing their truths. Spiritual victrolas who merely 
mouth truth do not impress us. We are taught to recognize the 
difference between a man's sermon and his life,- he must demon-
strate that he has experienced what he has learned. 
Assure Your Ultimate Arrival in Heaven 
When you try to experience your spiritual convictions an-
other world begins to open up to you. Don't live in a false sense 
of security, believing that because you have joined a church you 
will be saved. You yourself have to make the effort to know 
God. Your mind may be satisfied that you are very religious, but 
unless your consciousness is satisfied with direct answers to 
your prayers, no amount of formal religion can save you. Of 
what benefit is praying to God if He does not answer? Difficult 
though it is to obtain His response, it can be done. To assure 
your ultimate arrival in heaven, you must test the power of 
your prayers until you have made them effective. When I was 
just a little child I made up my mind that when I prayed, my 
prayer had to be answered. That kind of determination is the 
way. Every test comes then, to break your will, but God's power 
to respond is unlimited; the persistent continuity of your will 
power will bring His answer. 

38  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
You should learn to concentrate your thoughts. Therefore 
it is important to have time to be alone. Avoid the constant 
company of other people. Most of them are like sponges; they 
draw everything out of you, and you seldom receive anything 
in return. It is worthwhile to be with others only if they are 
sincere and strong, and if each one is conscious of the other's 
sincerity and strength, so that you exchange noble soul qualities. 
Do not while away your time in idleness. A great many 
people occupy themselves with inconsequential activities. Ask 
them what they have been doing and they will usually say, 
"Oh, I have been busy every minute!" But they can scarcely 
' remember what they were so busy about! Too many diversions, 
also, weaken your mental powers. If you go every day to the 
movies, they will lose their attraction, and you will become 
bored. Movies are all basically the same—lovers, heroes, and 
villains. We may enjoy a beautiful motion picture story, but 
life is seldom like that; if on the other hand it is too realistic, 
who wants to see more of life as it is, when he goes to be 
entertained? 
Life is very tricky and we must deal with it as it is. If we 
do not first master it ourselves we cannot help anyone else. In 
the seclusion of concentrated thought lies hidden the factory of 
all accomplishment. Remember that. In this factory continu-
ously weave your will pattern for attaining success over oppos-
ing difficulties. Exercise your will continuously. During the day 
and at night you have many opportunities  to work in  this 
factory, if you do not waste your time. At night I withdraw from 
the world's demands and am by myself, an absolute stranger to 
the world; it is a blank. Alone with my will power, I turn my 
thoughts in the desired direction until I have determined in my 
mind exactly what I wish to do and how to do it. Then I harness 
my will to the right activities and it creates success. In this way 
I have effectively used my will power many times. But it won't 
work unless the application of will power is continuous. 
It is a wonderful feeling to be able to say, and know, "My 
will power, surcharged by the Divine Will, shall accomplish 
my aim." If you lazily leave everything to the Divine Power 
and neglect to use your God-given will, results will not be 
forth-coming. The Divine Power of Its own accord wants to 

ANSWERED  PRAYERS  39 
help you; you don't have to coax. But you do have to use your 
will to demand as His child, and to behave as His child. You 
must banish the thought that the Lord with His wonderful 
power is far away in heaven, and that you are a helpless little 
worm buried in difficulties down here on earth.  Remember 
that behind your will is the great Divine Will; but that oceanic 
Power cannot come to your aid unless you are receptive.  / 
Surcharge Your Will Power Through Concentration 
The way to become receptive is to sit quietly and concen-
trate your thoughts on a worthy wish until your mind and 
thought become completely dissolved in that idea. Then will 
power becomes divine—omniscient and omnipotent—and can 
be successfully applied toward realizing your goal. You can't 
just sit there and wait for success to fall into your lap; once 
your course is set and your will is firm, you have to make a 
practical effort. Then you will see that whatever you require 
for success starts coming to you. Everything will push you in 
the right direction. In your divinely surcharged will power is 
the answer to prayer. When you use that will, you open the 
way through which your prayers can be answered. This is my 
experience. I used to attempt certain things just to test my will 
power,- but I don't do that anymore. I know it works. 
Once, long ago, I saw that one of my students was going 
wrong. Foreseeing the impending tragic results, I brought out 
every possible reason that might dissuade him from the course 
his life was taking; but I saw that no amount of my will power 
helped him, because he had made up his mind to follow the way 
of evil. "All right," I told myself finally, "it is 'good-bye'; let him 
go." But soon my great love and concern for him came to the 
fore again. I sat under a banyan tree and began to visualize him. 
Fervently and repeatedly I broadcast to him a mental message: 
"God has told me to command you to return." By evening my 
body and mind were athrill with the intuition that he was 
coming.* At last, there he was at the gate; the "prodigal son" 
* Great masters enjoy a divine awareness that permeates the entire body. For 
example, their intuitive perception of the wrong thoughts of a disciple may be 
felt physically, like sharp pinpricks, similarly, harmonious, happy intuitions 
are sometimes accompanied by a pleasant tingling sensation. (Publisher's  Note) 

40  MAN'S ETERNAL QUEST 
had come back to the fold. He pranamed and said, "All day long, 
wherever I went and whatever I did, I beheld your image. What 
was it all about?" 
"God was calling you through me," I replied. "It was His 
call, not mine. There was no selfish motive in my desire; but I 
had made up my mind I wouldn't stir from this place until you 
came." That kind of determination can change the world. A 
marvellous power! 
So, deep prayer does work. The best time to pray is at 
night, when there are fewer distractions. If necessary, sleep a 
little in the evening so that you are wide awake when you have 
your prayers at night, and have it out with God. At first it will 
seem hard, but as you keep on trying it will become easier. You 
will be surprised at the results. As soon as your will becomes 
powerful, God begins to answer. And when the Infinite conde-
scends to break His vow of silence, you will not be able to con-
tain your joy. But if you have an egotistic desire to demonstrate 
to others the power of your prayers, or if you commercialize it, 
you will lose that power. God will respond to you no more; you 
will have frightened Him away. He comes only when you are 
sincere and when you love Him for His own sake. When you 
are impressed with yourself and want to show off, He sees that 
you seek, not Him, but fame and glorification of your ego, and 
He will not come. 
Who Will Persist Until God Answers? 
God is not a mute unfeeling Being. He is love itself. If you 
know how to meditate to make contact with Him, He will 
respond to your loving demands. You do not have to plead; you 
can demand as His child. But which of you will spend the nec-
essary time? Which of you will persist until you become so 
concentrated that you receive an answer from Him? 
Suppose you have a mortgage on your home and you can-
not meet it. Or there is a certain job you want. In the silence 
that comes after meditating deeply, concentrate with unswerv-
ing will on the thought of your need. Do not keep looking for 
the result. If you sow a seed in the ground and then take it out 
every once in a while to see if it is growing, it will never sprout. 
Similarly, if every time you pray you look for a sign that the 

ANSWERED  PRAYERS  41 
Lord is granting your wish, nothing will happen. Never try to 
test God. Just go on praying unceasingly. Your duty is to bring 
your need to God's attention, and to do your part in helping 
God to bring that desire to fruition. For example, in chronic 
diseases, do your best to help promote healing, but know in 
your mind that  ultimately  God alone can help. Take  that 
thought with you into meditation every night, and with all 
your determination pray,- suddenly one day you will find the 
disease gone. 
First, the mind receives the suggestion. Then the Divine 
impregnates  the  mind  with  His  power.  Finally  the  brain 
releases the life energy to heal. You do not realize the power of 
God that is in your mind. It controls all the bodily functions. 
You can promote any condition in the body if you exercise that 
power of your mind. It is necessary first to learn the right 
method of meditation;  then you can apply its divinely em-
powered concentration to heal the body, or to help you in any 
other difficulty. 
Every day undertake something that is difficult for you, 
and try to do it. Though you fail five times, keep on, and as 
soon as you have succeeded in that direction, apply your con-
centrated will on something else. You will thus be able to 
accomplish increasingly greater things. Will is the instrument 
of the image of God within you. In will lies His  limitless 
power, the power that controls all the forces of nature. As you 
are made in His image, that power is yours to bring about 
whatever  you  desire:  You  can  create  prosperity,-  you  can 
change hatred into love. Pray until body and mind are com-
pletely subjugated; then you will receive God's response. I 
constantly find that my slightest wish is answered. 
Your Greatest Necessity Is God 
Between the eyebrows is the door to heaven. This centre* 
in the brain is the seat of will. When you concentrate deeply 
there and calmly will, whatever you are willing shall come 
about. So never use your will for evil purposes. To will harm 
to someone intentionally is a grave misuse of your God-given 
* The seat of the "single" or spiritual eye; the Kutastha,  or Christ  Con-
sciousness centre. 

42  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
power. If you find your will going in the wrong direction, stop! 
Not only is it a waste of your divine energy, it will be the cause 
of your losing that power; you will not be able to employ it 
even for good purposes. 
Determine honestly whether or not your prayer is legiti-
mate. Do not ask God for things that are quite impossible in the 
natural order of life. Ask only for true necessities. And know 
the difference between "necessary necessities" and "unneces-
sary necessities." The best way to cure yourself of desires for 
"unnecessary necessities" is to reason them away. Dreaming of 
big buildings used to be a hobby of mine, but that interest is 
gone now. I have plenty of them, and all the headaches that 
accompany their maintenance!  Ownership is a worrisome 
responsibility. Cut out desires for needless possessions. Con-
centrate only on your real needs. 
Your greatest necessity is God. He will give you not only 
your "necessary necessities," but your "unnecessary necessi-
ties" as well. He will satisfy your every desire when you are 
one with Him. Your wildest dreams will come true. 
When I was a little boy in India I so much wanted a pony, 
but my mother wouldn't allow me to have one. Some years 
later, after I had started my school for boys in Ranchi, I brought 
home a horse for our use. One morning I found she had given 
birth to a colt. Just what I had wanted in my childhood! Many 
such experiences have come to me. Long ago, while I was trav-
elling in Kashmir, I saw this building* in a vision.Years later, 
when I came to Los Angeles and saw this place, I recognized it 
as the building in my vision, and knew that God intended it to 
be ours. 
Follow the Rules of Prayer 
The first rule in prayer is to approach God only with le-
gitimate desires. The second is to pray for their fulfillment, not 
as a beggar, but as a son: "I am Thy child. Thou art my Father. 
Thou and I are One." When you pray deeply and continuously 
you will feel a great joy welling up in your heart. Don't be 
satisfied until that joy manifests; for when you feel that all-
*  Self-Realization Fellowship International Headquarters atop Mount Wash-
ington in Los Angeles. Paramahansaji's vision of it occurred around 1913. 

ANSWERED  PRAYERS  43 
satisfying joy in your heart, you will know that God has tuned 
in your prayer broadcast. Then pray to your Father: "Lord, this 
is my need. I am willing to work for it; please guide me and 
help me to have the right thoughts and to do the right things 
to bring about success. I will use my reason, and work with de-
termination, but guide Thou my reason, will, and activity to 
the right thing that I should do." This is how I have always 
prayed. Now, as soon as I ask God about some undertaking, I 
know whether I should do it or not, and I know what steps I 
should and should not take. 
Be practical and earnest about prayer. Concentrate deeply 
on what you are praying. Before you seek a job, or sign a con-
tract, or do anything important, think of that Power. Think of 
it continuously. Take time out of sleep. Your mind is habitu-
ated to resting at night from the day's duties, and keeps urging, 
"Sleep." You must answer with all your divine power of will: 
"Away with sleep! My engagement with God is more impor-
tant." Then you will receive God's response. 

Making Religion  Scientific 
First Self-Realization Fellowship Temple at 
Encinitas,* California, December 22, 1940 
God is approachable. Talking of Him and listening to His 
words in the scriptures, thinking of Him, feeling His presence 
in meditation, you will see that gradually the Unreal becomes 
real, and this world which you think is real will be seen as un-
real. There is no joy like that realization. 
The joy of God is boundless, unceasing, all the time new. 
Body, mind, nothing can disturb you when you are in that con-
sciousness—such is the grace and glory of the Lord. And He will 
explain to you whatever you haven't been able to understand; 
everything you want to know. 
There is no use trying to know too much now. How many 
incarnations would you have to spend to learn all that is writ-
ten in the book of nature? Millions of lives would not be suffi-
cient. So why bother? All things you will find and understand 
in God. The masters of India have always said, "First  know 
Him." Then, whatever you desire to know, He will reveal to 
you. This is His kingdom; this is His knowledge. 
As life goes on, its illusions fall away; you see what it is 
all about. And when the illusions of childhood and youth are 
gone, what  is there left?  Only in the divine  consciousness 
behind this door [Paramahansaji here touched his forehead to 
indicate the location of the Kutastha  centre, seat of the spiri-
tual eyet] can we find pure happiness. I cut the world out of 
* The first temple on the grounds of the Self-Realization Fellowship Her-
mitage in Encinitas was built in 1938 on a bluff overlooking the Pacific Ocean. 
It was called the Golden Lotus Temple. Gradual erosion of the shoreline ulti-
mately caused the structure to slip into the sea. 
t The spiritual eye is the pranic star door through which man must enter to 
attain superconsciousness, Christ Consciousness, and Cosmic Consciousness. 
"I am the door: by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in 
and out, and find pasture" (fohn 10:9 Bible). 
44 

\/LAKING RELIGION  SCIENTIFIC  45 
ny life because of its delusive influence, which makes unim-
)ortant things seem important. We are all living in a land of 
nake-believe, trying to "keep up with the Joneses"; yet it is 
)nly by remaining in the consciousness of Spirit that we can 
)e happy. Try it! 
God is eager to bring you to His kingdom, for He craves 
lomething too: that you spontaneously seek Him and cling to 
-iim. Otherwise, He would not have created the universe and 
nan. His perfection is not conditioned by this craving; but the 
>ne reason behind His creating us is His desire that we love 
iim and return to Him. He is looking forward to that time. In 
>ur love is His fulfilment. 
The Father has given us freedom to jump into the fire of 
vorld illusion or to return to His home. It is a question of what 
rou would like. Let us all go Home, that we need not come 
jack into this terrible world. We do not know under what con-
litions we will incarnate again. Certainly we do not want to 
>e reborn in times of suffering and depressions such as we are 
laving now. These troubles are the result of man's selfishness 
ind hate. The whole earth is groaning because God has been 
orgotten. 
Resolve now to go home to your Father. You are fearfully 
vasting your time, and you can't afford to. You don't know 
low fortunate you are to have been born as a human being. In 
hat you are blessed more than any other creature. The animal 
s not able to meditate and have God-communion. You have 
rour freedom to seek Him and you don't use it. You sit a little 
vhile in meditation and your mind wanders away. But when 
he mind prays and prays, and prays again, heaven opens. Then 
rou will be given all the convincing experiences by which you 
hall know that God is. 
God is Waiting for Your Invitation 
I speak not from book learning, but from perceptions of 
iod. I could not speak of Him this way if I didn't see or feel 
iim  He wouldn't let me. As I speak to you I see before me 
}
whatever I am talking about; many times I don't even see you. 
wouldn't tell you anything at all if I didn't know Him. But I 

46  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
am here to tell you that the very joy you are seeking in sex, 
money, wine, love, fame—that  joy is within yourself. You 
don't have to go elsewhere. You don't have to beg or flatter 
God; but you have to ask. You have to pray to Him sincerely 
and lovingly, "Come to me." 
You  are  not  determined  enough.  As  the  miser  loves 
money, as the lover loves the beloved, so should you love God; 
then you will find Him, without fail. It is difficult, but if at 
night you sit long in meditation you won't know time. Even 
when I don't get any sleep, I never miss it. When God comes, 
where is sleep? where is the body? Nothing matters but His 
intoxicating presence. You read in novels of ideal love, but it 
is nothing compared to the love of God. Hasten to Him. To be 
ever conscious of Him is the most wonderful existence. As I 
am talking to you, again and again the whole world  melts 
away and I feel only His Bliss. 
Creation Is Meant to Disillusion You 
Science devises methods for your physical comfort, stim-
ulating and catering to endless desires. But after a while crea-
ture comforts become burdens, pleasures no longer, because 
you find it is hard work to take care of them. Thus you "pay" 
for everything you get except divine blessedness. For that you 
have only to sit still and ask your Heavenly Father. If I thought 
I had to earn God I wouldn't try,- as a son I have a right to know 
Him. If you ask your right from the Father, He will give it to 
you. To those devotees who urge, He comes. That is what He 
wants. His whole creation is intended to disillusion you, and 
thus cause you to draw back to Him. You don't know when 
you will be taken away from this earth; there is no law that 
you will enjoy a long life. This proves how foolish it is to waste 
time. I live from minute to minute, day to day. I know only the 
joy of living; inside, complete resignation to Him. 
A  time  will  come  when  everything  will  be  made  or 
accomplished by will. Whatever you wish you will see done. 
This I have demonstrated again and again in my life. Develop-
ment of the heavenly power of will for its divinely intended 
use—to know God—is the only purpose in human life. He has 
created each one of you, and He is throbbing in you, crying to 

Paramahansa Yogananda, 1926 

At Mahatma Gandhi's Ashram in Wardha 
Sri Yogananda is reading a note that Gandhiji (right) has just written 
(it was a Monday, the Mahatma's day for observing silence). On the 
following day, August 27, 1935, at Gandhiji's request, Yoganandaji 
initiated him in Kriya Yoga. 
SRF Lake Shrine and Gandhi World Peace Memorial 
Each year thousands  of people from  all over the world enjoy the 
tranquil beauty of this scenic  location in Pacific Palisades, California. 
On the grounds, set amid verdant hillsides and flower gardens, are a 
hand-carved stone sarcophagus that enshrines a portion of Mahatma 
Gandhi's  ashes,  and  a  chapel  where  Self-Realization  Fellowship 
meditations, and classes are held weekly. The photo above shows a 
portion of the crowd in attendance when Paramahansa Yogananda 
dedicated the ten-acre Lake Shrine on August 20, 1950. 

MAKING RELIGION  SCIENTIFIC  47 
enter your consciousness so that He may release you. I am sure 
He feels guilty for having created us! Every day I ask Him why 
He did it. (I talk to Him about anything that comes to my 
mind. He likes it, that I am "after" Him; He knows His cre-
ation is anything but perfect.) The Lord replies that you cannot 
make steel until you have made the iron white-hot in fire. It is 
not meant for harm. Trouble and disease have a lesson for us. 
Our painful experiences are not meant to destroy us, but to 
burn out our dross, to hurry us back Home. No one is more 
anxious for our release than God. 
It is His voice that is speaking through me. If only one per-
son responds and finds his freedom in Spirit, my task is done. 
The salvation of one life is worth more than the conversion of 
thousands.  I tell you of one Master of this  universe—one 
Beloved who is waiting for you, crying for you. You don't know 
how He rejoices when a soul enters His kingdom! He gathers 
all the angels together and they celebrate that soul's entrance 
into heaven. What joy there is! 
For good reason you are not allowed to remember your 
past incarnations. Suppose you have been born ten times. You 
have therefore had ten mothers. How can you love them all the 
same? You are meant to learn that behind those ten mothers 
there is One Mother,- behind all friends, One Friend; behind all 
fathers, One Father; behind all loves, One Love. How wonder-
ful is that recognition! It is as if you had been playing hide-and-
seek in the corridors of incarnations, and then you find Him! 
When I realized that One Love, I could not contain myself. My 
mind vanished into the Infinite Kingdom. It is so, even now. 
The joy of Spirit is endless. 
Seek a Definite Understanding of Truth 
In the physical sciences everything is systematized into 
definite conceptions: combine two particular substances, or two 
substances in a particular way, for a certain result. The great 
masters of Self-Realization Fellowship [Yogoda Satsanga Soci-
ety of India] are telling you why you should seek God scientif-
ically, and the scientific way to get to Him. Every effort you 
make to follow these instructions will bring to you a definite 
understanding. Some read a little about the spiritual laws, and 

48  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
then put the book aside. That is not the way to Self-knowledge. 
You must make these truths a practical part of your life. 
Most people don't take religion seriously. They keep it in 
the realm of imagination and fancy. In India we are taught the 
practical use of religion. We don't say, "Well, I shall find out all 
about God in the hereafter." We want to know God now. 
Science and religion should go hand in hand. All the re-
sults of scientific investigation are definite and are connected 
by reason, whereas religion is often dogmatic. When  Jesus 
urged his disciples to have faith, he didn't mean blind belief. It 
breaks my heart when I see blind dogmatism, for it is one rea-
son why the majority of people have no real interest in God. 
Although there are nevertheless many who are interested in 
God, real seekers are few, because hardly anyone tries to un-
derstand his way out of this dream drama. Few of His children 
appreciate the gifts of the Heavenly Father, and of those who 
do, fewer still try deeply or scientifically enough to know Him. 
Those who want to seek Him earnestly should learn how to do 
so scientifically. 
By Yoga, Religion Can Be Made Scientific 
Yoga is definite and scientific. Yoga means union of soul 
and God,  through  step-by-step  methods  with  specific  and 
known results. It raises the practice of religion above the dif-
ferences of dogma. My guru, Sri Yukteswar, extolled Yoga,- he 
did not, however,  indicate that  realization  of God  thereby 
would be immediate. "You have to work hard for it," he told 
me. I did, and when the promised results came, I saw that Yoga 
was marvellous.* 
Those who do not give time to their religion cannot expect 
to know all at once about God and the hereafter. Usually peo-
ple don't make the effort, or if they do, the effort is not deep 
and sincere enough. Nighttime should be spent with God. You 
sleep more than necessary,  and thus waste  many  valuable 
hours. Night was meant to screen all the attractions of the 
* "[O Arjuna,) I have this day informed thee about that same ancient yoga, for 
thou art My devotee and friend. This sacred mystery (of yoga) is, indeed, the 
producer of supreme benefit (to mankind)" (Bhagavad Cita IV:3). 

MAKING RELIGION  SCIENTIFIC  49 
world, that you might the more intently explore the kingdom 
of God. He created darkness to obscure material objects, for He 
wants you to forget the world at night and seek Him. Read the 
scriptures, read the Lessons,*  and meditate—the glory and the 
joy it brings! Nothing else can give you that experience. See if 
it isn't true. 
Remember,  if you don't find God, you are not  making 
enough effort in your meditation. Should you not find the pearl 
after one or two divings, don't blame the ocean. Blame your 
diving; you are not going deep enough. If you dive really deep 
you will find the pearl of His presence. Unless we apply defi-
nite methods of science in practising religion, it becomes little 
more than a salve for our conscience. "Oh yes, I go to church 
every Sunday," people say; but they don't know why they go. 
And once they have said "Amen" after the sermon, they forget 
all about church until the next Sunday. Isn't that foolish? If you 
do not commune with God there, why should you go? 
The saints say that if you coax God earnestly enough, you 
can see Him. But you have to do it all yourself. It is good to 
meditate with a few others, but make the supreme effort alone 
at night, not just in church on Sundays. Get away from every-
one. It is good for your health, your nerves, and your longevity 
not to mix too much with people. Most of them are thinking 
only of what you can give them. Hardly anyone thinks of your 
highest welfare except your spiritual teacher and God.  The 
wise teacher will give you but one instruction: think of God. 
And share Him,- there is no form of service greater than to 
speak of God. If you convince someone that the path of error 
leads to the valley of death, and that the path of meditation 
leads to everlasting life, you have given him something of more 
value than a million dollars. Money is perishable, but realiza-
tion of God will go with us beyond the portals of the grave. 
Therefore whenever I see anyone striving and struggling with 
great intensity to know God, it gives me great joy. 
Although I am planning and doing things in the world, it 
is only to please  the  Lord. I test  myself:  even when  I am 
Scientific principles of yoga meditation are taught in the Yogoda  Sat-
sanga Lessons,  available from the Yogoda Satsanga Society of India, Ranchi, 
Jharkhand. 

50  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
working I whisper within,  "Where are You, Lord?" and the 
whole world changes. There is nothing but a great Light, and 
I am a little bubble in that Ocean of Light. Such is the joy of 
existence in God. 
The experiences I have told you about are scientifically at-
tainable. If you follow the spiritual laws, the result is certain. 
If the result doesn't come, find fault with your effort. Intensity 
in all your religious practices is the only way. Those who don't 
meditate regularly and deeply are restless wherever they do 
meditate, and give up after a short effort. But if you make a 
greater effort day by day, the ability to go deep will come. I 
don't have to make any effort now; the whole world is gone 
instantly  when  I  close  my  eyes  and gaze  into  the  Christ 
[Kutastha]  centre. And I used to sit for hours trying to forget 
the body and the thoughts! I came to a point where I thought 
it was no use. But I saw it was my fault. Between the restless 
thoughts and God there is a wall; the ordinary person doesn't 
try, so he never gets over that wall. But the spiritual fighter 
goes on. When the mind becomes still, you are in the kingdom 
of the Infinite. Those who have spent too much time on fool-
ish things remain fruitlessly knocking outside. 
Communion with God is the only thing to live for. You 
will have to come to that understanding eventually, often after 
much suffering. Why not learn now? He is ready to welcome 
you. You can't fail to reach God ultimately. It is foolish to ask, 
"Will I be able to get into the kingdom of heaven?" There is no 
other place you can stay, for that is your real home. You don't 
have to earn it. You are already God's child, made in His im-
age. You have only to tear away the mask of the human being 
and realize your divine birthright. 
Satan Makes Us Think God Is Unattainble 
So never say that you won't be able to get into the king-
dom of heaven. Satan drops that delusive thought in your mind 
to keep you here. You are not a mortal being. When I heard that 
from my guru I was overjoyed. Thereafter I refused to consider 
myself a sinner. Nor should you call yourself a sinner,- it is a 
desecration of the image of God within you. Nor should you 
let anyone else call you a sinner. What does it matter, what you 

MAKING RELIGION  SCIENTIFIC  51 
were yesterday? You are a child of God, now and evermore. 
Who can keep you away from the kingdom of God? That is 
how you should feel. But you must scientifically pursue Him. 
The science of religion is to make the effort in meditation un-
til God becomes real to you, until you know that He alone is 
real. I used to go to the crematory grounds and pray to see 
through the delusion of the world; I cried in the woods, I clos-
eted myself in the attic, praying unceasingly until that realiza-
tion  came.  I beheld  burning  worlds  steaming  and  fuming 
around the feet of my Divine Mother. * In the light of Her wis-
dom all my mortality was consumed. 
Meditation Is the True Practice of Religion 
The true practice of religion is to sit still in meditation and 
talk to God. But you don't get to that point of intensity, you 
don't concentrate enough, and that is why you remain in delu-
sion. To teach the value of long, intense concentration on God, 
I instituted an all-day Christmas meditation just before Christ-
mas each year.t At first the devotees feel only how long it is, 
but  as they go deep they become  oblivious  of time.  Most 
churchgoers can't sit still for an hour unless there is something 
going on all the while to divert their minds. 
To be in the consciousness of God is entirely different; it 
comes when you sit quietly and say: "One by one I close the 
doors of the senses, lest the aroma of the rose or the song of the 
nightingale distract my love from Thee."* And as you go on 
saying that with deeper and deeper concentration and devotion, 
you will see after a little while that you have forgotten all dis-
tractions; before your inward gaze a light appears, or saints ap-
pear, or you are engulfed in a deep peace or divine joy. 
* "That aspect of the Uncreated Infinite which is active in creation is referred 
to in Hindu scriptures as the Divine Mother. The Lord in the form of the Cos-
mic Mother appears in living tangibility before true bhaktas  (devotees of a Per-
sonal God)."—Paramahansa Yogananda in Autobiography  of a Yogi. 
+ A spiritual custom begun by Paramahansaji in 1931 and carried on by Yogo-
dans/Self-Realizationists in their ashrams,  temples, and centres throughout 
the world. Daylong meditations are also held at other times during the year, 
on days of special spiritual significance. (Publisher's  Note) 
* From "Prayer at Night" in Paramahansa Yogananda's Whispers from Eternity. 

52  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
Any spiritual activity does good by keeping the thought of 
God alive, but what is ultimately necessary is this intensity of 
effort to know Him. There should be centres of meditation all 
over the world, where devotees come together to commune 
with God. When I come to the temple it is for one purpose: to 
be with God and to tell you of God. And you come here for my 
words and to try by meditation to feel His presence. 
One moon dispels the darkness of the heavens. So is one 
soul who is trained to know God, a soul in whom there is true 
devotion and sincere seeking and intensity; and wherever he 
will go he will dispel the spiritual darkness of others. Those 
who are even thinking of God shine a little, but they are not 
able to give light to the world. Ordinary religious people are 
like stars, giving only a tiny light. 
Meditation Provides the Proof of God's Existence 
By scientific meditation become a true devotee, that like 
the moon you dispel the darkness around yourself and others. 
Without realization through meditation, religion is the most 
mysterious book of all; you will never be able to understand it. 
But by meditation you have the proof of God's existence. 
Go to your room and shut the door—make no fuss. Sit 
down and talk to God. Practise meditation. Let your mind be-
come so intense that the next time you sit to meditate you 
won't have to make the effort; your mind will be fixed im-
mediately on Him. If you don't make a great effort to conquer 
physical and mental restlessness in the beginning, you will 
have difficulty every time you meditate throughout the years. 
But if you make that supreme effort at the start, you will 
soon be happy and free. 
When I utter the name "God" my whole being melts away 
in His Joy. But that I had to work for. Make the effort. I was not 
at first the devotional kind. My mind used to be very restless. 
But now it is just like fire. As soon as I put my mind at the 
christ centre, all thoughts are gone—breath, heart, and mind 
are instantly still, and I am aware only of Spirit. 
Make religion real by scientific methods. Science gives 
you definiteness and certainty. Sit quietly and practise  the 
methods that have been given by great yogis of India: Maha-

MAKING RELIGION  SCIENTIFIC  53 
vat ar Babaji, Lahiri Mahasaya, Swami Sri Yukteswar. * Find in 
yourself that supreme blessedness of which I speak to you, and 
when you do you will see that religion is no longer a myth but 
a scientific certainty. Pray to Him, "Lord, You are the Master 
of creation, so I come to You. I will never give up until You talk 
to me and make me realize Your presence. I will not live with-
out You." 
Intensity, Secrecy, Devotion, and Constancy Are Necessary 
The great Indian saint Sri Ramakrishna was worshiping a 
stone image of Kali, the Cosmic Mother, and praying for Her to 
appear to him  in  reality.  His  spiritual  anguish  became  so 
intense that he felt life was no longer worth living. At this 
moment his eyes fell on a sword that was kept in the temple, 
and like a madman he seized it, with the intention of ending 
his life. In that moment the Mother revealed Herself in Her 
cosmic form. Her devotee was engulfed in an oceanic Bliss. In 
the very place where the saint had this experience, that same 
stone statue of the Divine Mother assumed a living from and 
spoke to me.t 
If I hadn't spent hours seeking God in meditation I would 
not have known that religion is a science. Intensity, secrecy, 
devotion, and constancy are necessary. You don't know when 
death will come. Every minute keep your mind on God. Every-
thing you want and need is right within you; seek long and 
seek deeply. I meditate for hours; I see no one until I am fin-
ished. You must make up your mind that you are not going to 
be bothered by anyone or anything. Then you won't  know 
time. 
In my Yogoda school in Ranchi,*  Jharkhand,  I used to 
spend all my spare time roaming around the grounds, here and 
there sitting awhile to meditate, until my mind was drunk 
with God. That is the only way to find Him. Don't waste your 
* Including Paramahansa Yogananda, these are the Yogoda Satsanga Society of 
India/Self-Realization Fellowship line of Gurus. (See Gurus  in glossary.) (Pub-
lisher's  Note) 
t The experience is related in Autobiography  of a Yogi, "The Heart of a Stone 
Image." 
* See Ranchi school  in glossary. 

54  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
time. When you are able to live in the divine consciousness, 
four to six hours of sleep are plenty; you will never feel tired, 
you will never miss sleep. Sleep is under my control; it is the 
same with eating. I have something infinitely greater, and God 
has proven that when He is with me all the "necessities of life" 
become unnecessary. In that consciousness you become more 
healthy than the average person, more joyous, more bountiful 
in every way. Don't seek little things,- they will divert you from 
God. Start your experiment now: make life simple and be a 
king. 

