THE PHYSICAL AND SPIRITUAL REWARDS OF FASTING  105 
and how much, food you take into your body. 
Know the Right Way to Fast 
In fasting you must know what to do. That is why proper 
supervision is necessary for a fast longer than three days. I 
don't advise anyone to make his first fast a long one, for he will 
become weak. A one-day fast on fruit each week, or a three-day 
fast on orange juice each month, are good ways to accustom 
oneself to fasting. The faster must be mentally prepared for 
those who will immediately begin to sympathize and tell him 
that he will become sick and die if he doesn't eat. It is true that 
on a longer fast you may feel weak during the first few days, 
because the life force has been accustomed to dependence on 
food. But gradually, as the days pass, you no longer feel any 
weakness. Your life force and spirit become detached from 
food. You see that the body is sustained by life force alone. 
I know the secret by which one can fast and still not lose 
weight. The life force, when under one's conscious  control, 
may be utilized to take off flesh or to keep the body at normal 
weight. Either way, it is effective. When this principle is ap-
plied, the normal temperature of the body does not go down, 
no  matter  how  long  one  fasts.  Drawing  energy  from  the 
medulla, the "mouth of God,"*  the life force begins to rely 
more and more on its innate regenerative power instead of 
depending on outside sources. 
Human beings in a perfect state of suspended animation 
can be buried for five thousand years or unto eternity and re-
main alive. Life is eternal. It depends not on breath, nor on 
food, water, or sunshine. Remember always that you are the 
Imperishable Spirit. This is the way to live. 
Our consciousness survives after death, but the ordinary 
man loses that feeling of continuity and so thinks he is dead. 
* Matthew  4:4 (Bible): "Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word 
[prana, life energy) that proceedeth out of the mouth of God (that flows forth 
from the medulla into the body)." It is through the centre of superconscious-
ness in the medulla that God breathes His "word"—cosmic  intelligent 
vibration, or energy—into man. A reservoir of this energy accumulates in the 
brain. Thence it flows down from the medulla into the five spiritual centres 
(chakras) in the spine, which act as distributors, feeding this life energy to all 
Parts of the body. 

106  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
Every one of us is going to die someday, so there is no use in 
being afraid of death. You don't feel miserable at the prospect 
of losing consciousness of your body in sleep,- you accept sleep 
as a state of freedom to look forward to. So is death; it is a state 
of rest, a pension from this life. There is nothing to fear. When 
death comes, laugh at it. Death is only an experience through 
which you are meant to learn a great lesson: you cannot die. 
Why wait for death when you can realize this now? The first 
lesson you have to learn is that life is not dependent on food. 
By fasting you can prove it to yourself. 
Function Well Under All Circumstances 
Everyone should develop his mental power, so that he is 
able to function well under all circumstances—sleep  or no 
sleep, food or no food, vacation or no vacation. Regularity is ad-
mirable and necessary; we must acquire the habit of regularity 
in order to obey the laws of God. But to be unable to deviate 
from that habit without ill effect is wrong. 
All the fundamental habits of a child are formed between 
the ages of three and seven. Good environment will help to 
guide his development, but to change (if desirable) the salient 
tendencies of a child, special training is required. In my school 
in Ranchi, India, I gave the boys rigid training of the body. They 
fasted often, and slept on a blanket on the floor, never using pil-
lows. Sometimes they meditated for hours. To help children by 
rigid discipline to be free from the tyranny of the body is to 
confer on them a lifelong blessing. One of the schoolboys sat 
for twelve hours in meditation without winking his eyes. If 
you had such poise, how much happier you would be! How 
much more peace you would have! The greatest training lies in 
scientific, balanced discipline of the body, mind, and spirit. And 
in that lies the heart of fasting. 
The Metaphysical Science Behind Fasting 
There is a great metaphysical science behind fasting. Jesus 
reminded us of this truth when he said: "Man shall not live by 
bread alone ...." Two things keep you bound to earth: breath 
and "bread." In sleep, however, you are peacefully unaware of 
any need for either breath or food; your spirit is detached from 
body-consciousness. Fasting uplifts the mind in the same way. 

THE PHYSICAL  AND SPIRITUAL  REWARDS OF  FASTING  107 
Through  fasting,  let your mind depend on its own  power. 
When that power manifests, the life force in the body becomes 
increasingly reinforced with the eternal energy continually 
flowing  into  the  brain  and spine  from  the  cosmic  energy 
around the body, entering through the medulla. Becoming de-
tached from dependence on outer physical sources of bodily 
sustenance, the life force sees that it is being supported from 
within, and wonders how this is so. The mind then says: "The 
solids on which the body used to depend are nothing  more 
than gross condensations of energy. You are pure energy. And 
you are pure consciousness." Then, whatever command the 
mind impinges on the consciousness of the life force, it will 
manifest accordingly. 
Anything can be done by mind power. So you see how un-
just it is to the mind and to the all-powerful life force within 
you, to say you can't live without food. Make your life and 
body impervious to suffering. Conquer yourself. By long fast-
ing you realize that everything is mind. 
Every force and object in this universe is a product of the 
Divine Mind, in the same way that all the things you per-
ceive in a dream are creations of your own mind. On the con-
scious plane also, if your mind creates the thought that the 
body will be weak from fasting, it will be weak; or if you 
have been fasting, and momentarily think it is making you 
weak, the body will actually feel weak. But if you make up 
your mind that the body is strong, it will not feel any weak-
ness;  rather,  it will  feel great power. Most  people do not 
know this because they have never tried it. The mind will 
not show its miracles unless you make it work. And it will 
not work so long as you continue to depend more and more 
on material things. That is why its marvels remain hidden 
from ordinary vision. But when, through fasting, you learn 
how to depend on mind, it will work in everything, whether 
conquering disease, or creating prosperity, or realizing the 
supreme goal of life—finding God. "The self-governed yogi— 
he whose mind is fully under control—thus engaging his soul 
in ceaseless meditative union with Spirit, attains the peace 
of My being: the final Nirvana (deliverance)."* 
* Bhagavad Gita VI: 15. 

Self-realization: 
Criterion of Religion 
Self-Realization Fellowship Temple, 
Los Angeles, California, August 22, 1933 
First Self-Realization Fellowship Temple, 
Encinitas, California, August 27, 1939 
(Compilation) 
The temple God loves most is the temple of His devotee's 
inner silence and peace. Whenever you enter this  beautiful 
temple here, * leave restlessness and worries behind. If you do 
not let go of them, God will not be able to come to you. First 
establish in yourself a temple of beauty and peace,- there you 
will find Him, on the altar of your soul. 
Sometimes one feels discouraged, thinking it is too late to 
find God. It is never too late. The Bhagavad Gita teaches that 
if one realizes that this world is false and only Spirit is real, 
though it be in the last moment before death, he will enter a 
better world after his earth-exit.t 
Sooner or later each one of us will be taken away from this 
earth. Find out now what life is all about. The great purpose of 
your experiences here is to stimulate you to search out their 
meaning. Don't give importance to this procession of human-
ity. As time marches on, you must eventually realize that you 
are a part of the great One. Make God-realization your goal. 
Mahavatar Babaji said that even a little bit of this  dharma— 
righteous action, seeking to know God—will save you from 
* Golden Lotus Temple formerly at Encinitas, California, 
t "O Arjuna! this is the 'established in Brahman' state. Anyone entering this 
state is never (again) deluded. Even at the very moment of transition (from the 
physical to the astral), if one becomes anchored therein, he attains the final, ir-
revocable, state of Spirit-communion" (Bhagavad Gita 11:72). 
108 

SELF-REALIZATION:  CRITERION  OF RELIGION  109 
dire fears.* The prospect of death, or of failure or other griev-
ous troubles, awakens in man a great dread. When you are 
helpless to help yourself, when your family cannot do anything 
for you, when no one else can give you aid, what then is the 
state of your mind? Why allow yourself to be put in such a po-
sition? Find God, and anchor yourself in Him. Before anyone 
else was with you, who was with you? God. And when you 
leave this earth, who will be with you? Only God. But you 
won't be able to know Him then unless you make friends with 
Him now. If you deeply seek God, you will find Him. 
Everything in creation is a temptation to lure you from 
God. But He is more tempting than any earthly temptation. If 
you attain even a glimpse of Him you will realize this; and you 
can find Him by inner prayer and meditation and by strong de-
termination. Your resolutions with God must be firm,- He will 
not come so long as your mind is roaming elsewhere. He wants 
to come to you but you don't let Him,- you would rather seek 
a little sense pleasure or spend your time on books or cocktail 
parties. So God says, "All right, My child, play on." 
If God is seeking anything, it is our love. He knocks at 
every heart and asks us to come unto Him, but most persons 
don't want to go. Yet when they get into trouble or become 
sick, they are quick to call for Him. He who makes friends 
with the Lord while he is prosperous and happy will always 
find God near when he needs Him. But he who procrastinates 
in forming that relationship will have to fight his tests alone 
until, through wisdom and unconditional surrender, he finds 
the Eternal Friend. 
Out of this great mass of humanity only a few are deeply 
seeking God. Where are they who thought this earth was theirs 
two hundred years ago? All are gone—and from among them 
perhaps only a few understood the truth about life and became 
Self-realized devotees of the Lord. Nevertheless, each succeed-
ing generation thinks this life is real! For the little while you 
are here you make much of this show. Don't become too in-
volved in it. Find God! He is trying to draw us with His love. 
He is showing us all the miracles we could want to see—the 
* Paraphrasing the Bhagavad Gita, 11:40. 

110  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
wonders of growing things and the perfect routine in nature. He 
is right there behind the flowers. Seek Him out. The scientist 
didn't make his discoveries by the use of blind prayer; he fol-
lowed the laws of science. If you apply scientific spiritual laws 
with sincere devotion, God will be with you automatically. 
Open your eyes of devotion, for by continuous ardour plus ap-
plication of spiritual law you will find Him. 
Spiritual Development Must Balance Material Advancement 
Different nations have specialized in different arts and sci-
ences; India mastered the scientific art of God-realization. I 
have come to teach you India's spiritual science. Unless a bal-
ance is created by developing spiritual realization along with 
advancement of the physical sciences, individuals and nations 
will be lost in misery and destruction. If today's world leaders 
were illumined by Self-realization, and worked together, they 
could within a few years banish war and poverty from  the 
earth. Only spiritual consciousness—realization of God's pres-
ence in oneself and in every other living being—can save the 
world. I see no chance for peace without it. Begin with your-
self. There is no time to waste. It is your duty to do your part 
to bring God's kingdom on earth. 
Many persons hesitate to seek God, imagining that life 
will then have to be gloomy. Not so! The unalloyed happiness 
I find in communing with the Lord no words can  describe. 
Night and day I am in a state of joy. That joy is God. To know 
Him is to perform the funeral rites for all your sorrows. He 
does not require you to be stoic and morose. This is not the 
right concept of God, nor the way to please Him.  Without 
being happy you will not even be able to find Him. The more 
peaceful you are, the more you will be able to feel His pres-
ence. The happier you are, the greater will be your attunement 
with Him. Those who know Him are always happy, because 
God is joy itself. 
People try to find happiness in drink, sex, and money, but 
the pages of history are filled with tales of their disillusion-
ment. The time I have spent in meditation has made my life 
unimaginably fruitful. A thousand bottles of wine could not 
produce the joy it has given me. In that joy is the conscious 

SELF-REALIZATION:  CRITERION  OF  RELIGION  111 
guidance of God's wisdom. When you are attuned with Him in 
this way, even though you unwittingly do wrong it will be 
righted by the Lord's omniscient direction; if you make a poor 
judgment it will be corrected by Him. 
Wait no longer! Whoever hears this message, know that I 
am speaking truth. It is His voice, His power, His authority. If 
I were to display all the powers that God has given to  me, 
throngs would come. But I do not seek that kind of following. 
Not powers, but the love of God must attract you,- for only 
then will you change and make an effort to know Him. That is 
my aim. 
I could not preach about God in this way if I did not know 
Him. In the same way you can know Him. That is why I stress 
Self-realization, which means you can know within your own 
consciousness that what I am saying is true. You don't have to 
believe,- you can know.  If I had a thousand mouths, I would 
speak through them all to convince you. 
My Only Wish Is to Give You a Glimpse of God 
You don't realize how much you miss God, because you 
have never known Him. Once you do contact Him, no power 
on earth will be able to turn you away from Him. My  only 
wish is to give you a glimpse of God, because having Him, no 
other gain is greater. Satan tempted Jesus with dominion over 
the whole world; but he said, "Get thee behind me,  Satan."* 
Jesus had that Something which is infinitely greater. Knowing 
God is more satisfying than the fulfillment of any earthly de-
sire. Every lesser wish of your heart will be taken care of when 
you have Him who is your greatest Treasure. This is my own 
true testimony. He fulfilled my every desire. I do not  seek 
things now; they seek me. When God gives Himself to you, He 
will fulfill your slightest wish. It is not necessary to ask. That 
is the state you want. But first you have to prove that you de-
sire the Lord Himself more than His gifts. 
Out of the abundance God has given me I have kept noth-
mg for myself. I am always free, for nothing belongs to me. I 
am working only for Him and for all of you. Because of this, 
* Luke 4:8. 

112  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
anytime the thought of some need crosses my mind, God ful-
fills it. I have to take care what I mentally tell the Lord, for it 
is sure to materialize! This state of satisfaction no worldly 
prosperity can give. 
God is seeking you; you must seek Him. Follow this Self-
Realization [Yogoda Satsanga] way. It will bring you to Him 
more quickly than any other path. I have tried all methods; and 
I  entered  this  path  on  the  basis  of  reason,  not  emotion. 
Through the demonstration of their own realization, the great 
masters of Self-Realization Fellowship [Yogoda Satsanga Soci-
ety of India] have shown that by following their way you can 
find the Lord, you can be among the greatest of the spiritually 
great, just as by learning from a great scientist you can become 
a great scientist, if you apply yourself. Charcoal does not re-
ceive and reflect the sunlight, but the diamond does. Charcoal 
mentalities, full of doubts and negation and spiritual slothful-
ness, cannot receive God. But diamond mentalities, sincere and 
full of faith and perseverance, receive and reflect the wisdom 
of the Divine Consciousness. 
It Is Necessary to Understand the Meaning of Religion 
To most persons religion is a matter of family tradition or 
social benefit or moral habit. They have no conception of the 
importance of religion. When I asked one man what religion he 
followed, he replied: "Nothing in particular. I change churches 
according to convenience." 
Those who are not seeking God as the paramount neces-
sity of life do not understand the meaning of religion. Why do 
all people seek money? Because they are conditioned to the 
thought that money is essential to supply the things they need 
for their well-being. They don't have to be told this; they sim-
ply know it. Why then do most people not understand the 
necessity of knowing God? Because they lack imagination and 
discrimination. Very early in life I saw that theological and 
even scriptural answers to certain questions could never fully 
satisfy the soul, unless their truth were experienced through 
realization  and  God-communion.  For  example,  when  my 
mother died and when other loved ones began to be taken away 
from me, I rebelled inwardly against it; but no one could give 
me an explanation that satisfied me. I decided I had to find the 

SELF-REALIZATION:  CRITERION  OF  RELIGION  113 
answer myself, through my own effort. "I am not going to ac-
cept this blindly," I vowed. "I am going to find the answer from 
Him who is the Maker of this universe." I sought directly from 
God the understanding of life's mysteries that I could not find 
in the teachings in the churches and temples. If religion could 
not satisfy me as to why some persons are born poor and some 
rich, some blind and some healthy, how could it convince me 
of the justice of God? The masters of India, by attaining God 
communion, found the answers to life's riddles through inner 
realization, and showed us how we can do likewise. 
There are many kinds of religionists in the world, and each 
religion has its own cross-section of this diversity. There are 
those whose approach to religion is wholly emotional. When 
their feelings are played upon too much they become hysteri-
cal with religion. But in an extreme display of emotion one 
loses touch with God. Emotionally excitable types want "pep" 
in religion; when you lecture from the intellectual plane they 
fall asleep. It is too dull, they say. But playing upon others' 
emotions is simply juggling with their minds,- it is not giving 
them Truth, or God. 
The intellectual religionist delights in hearing about vari-
ous theological or philosophical concepts, flattering himself 
that he is on a higher rung of divine understanding than the 
emotional religionist. But intellectual stimulation, also, is only 
another kind of "drug," a different form of mental juggling that 
does not give the seeker what he really needs, any more than 
does over-stirring of the emotions. 
Religionists who cling blindly to dogma will often parrot 
what they do not really understand or have not realized. When 
you ask them questions, they quote scriptures and tenets like 
spiritual victrolas. It is useless to reason with them because 
they are so sure they know it all. 
True Religion Satisfies the Demands of Your Soul 
Dogmatic religionists are convinced that if you do not be-
lieve in a certain way you are doomed. Science does not teach 
you in that way; it proves its points. And true religion satis-
fies the demands of your soul, not by words but by proof. I 
wanted never to be so dogmatic that I would stop using my 

114  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
reason and common  sense. When I met my guru,  Sri  Yuk-
teswar, he said: "Many teachers will tell you to believe; then 
they put out your eyes of reason and instruct you to follow 
only their logic. But I want you to keep your eyes of reason 
open; in addition, I will open in you another eye, the eye of 
wisdom."*  Sri Yukteswarji gave me a teaching whose truth I 
could realize for myself. That is why I followed this path. No 
one can shake me from it. 
The liberalist is the other extreme of the dogmatist. He 
follows everything! In the belief that he is being broadminded 
he says, "All spiritual paths are good; therefore I will not bind 
myself to any one of them." While respecting all, it is better to 
adhere to one path than to be a religious butterfly,  flitting 
everywhere. Avoid both false liberality and blind dogmatism. 
Cling dogmatically only to wisdom, and you will find God. 
Every effort one makes for God will be noticed by Him. 
However, if one doesn't follow a proven scientific way to God, 
his progress is comparable to riding in an old bullock cart. Sin-
cere seekers will receive some realization, no matter what path 
they follow,- but with only blind belief and mechanical prayers 
it could take them incarnations to reach the Lord. 
Whatever Religion You Choose, Give It a Good Test 
Seek until you find the path most suited to the spiritual 
inclination  of your heart  and mind, and then be  steadfast. 
Whatever you take up, give it a good test. In the same way 
give  the  Self-Realization  [Yogoda  Satsanga]  teachings  a 
chance. Jewelers can tell a good gem from a fake, and the gen-
uine spiritual teacher can differentiate between sincere and 
idle seekers. There are some who take the  Self-Realization 
Fellowship  [Yogoda Satsanga]  Lessons  but do not study or 
practice them. Ask them what the teaching is about, and they 
reply vaguely,  "Oh, it is grand!" If you ask what they have 
* The eye of intuition, or divine wisdom; the omniscient spiritual eye. "The 
deluded do not perceive Him staying or departing or experiencing the world of 
the gunas  (qualities). Those whose eye of wisdom is open see Him" (Bhagavad 
Gita  XV: 10).  "When  thine  eye  is single,  thy  whole  body also  is full  of 
light... .Take heed, therefore, that the light which is in thee be not darkness" 
[Luke  11:34-35, Bible). 

SELF-REALIZATION:  CRITERION  OF  RELIGION  115 
learned, they go on about what a good teaching it is, "but I 
haven't practised it." Those who practise know the blessings 
of this path. 
Seekers should be taught to find God first. To concentrate 
on money or health as primary objectives in following a reli-
gion is to become sidetracked. True, it is through God that one 
receives everything else; but he who seeks other things first 
will feel the bonds of limitations. A qualified spiritual teacher 
knows and loves the Lord; his supreme interest is in God. One 
teacher tried to persuade me to accept his spiritual guidance 
with the promise that I would have a great many followers. His 
offer did not attract me, because I wanted God alone. Great 
teachers will always seek to interest you in knowing the Lord. 
They will not take you up a blind alley. 
Without God-communion, the lifeblood of religion is miss-
ing. Church is not the place for dances, movies, and frequent 
social gatherings. These divert people from God. One can find 
sufficient worldly entertainment in town. Go to church for one 
reason: communion with God. Divine communion is the crite-
rion of religion. That is what my guru taught me, and that is 
why I have followed him unconditionally and wholeheartedly. 
As a result of his teaching I am enjoying that sacred commu-
nion with the Lord every moment of my existence. That is 
what religion must be. 
If I tell you of a wonderful fruit I have found, and describe 
it to you in detail every day for a year without ever giving you 
a taste of it, you won't be satisfied. Hearing about truth cannot 
relieve the soul's hunger,- if you are content to hear truth with-
out making any effort to know God, it has falsely satisfied you. 
You must hunger so deeply for God that you will seek Him out 
in earnest. The purpose of religious lectures and sermons is to 
awaken in you that irresistible soul-longing for Him. 
Realizing God Requires Self-Disciplinary Effort 
Once in a while I meet someone in whom I see a little bit 
of real devotion for the Lord. But God-realization is so much 
greater than that! The God-knowing devotee sometimes sees 
the whole world filled with His light—a wonderful experience. 
But it can't come to you in one minute. Realizing God requires 

116  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
long perseverance in the practice of those methods that lead to 
Self-realization. 
The desire for happiness is the strongest desire of all. True 
and lasting happiness is found in God. When you discover Him, 
a great joy will come over you, a joy you will find nowhere else. 
Sri Yukteswarji said to me: "When your joy in meditation and 
communion becomes greater than any other joy, you have 
found God.* If the whole world were given to you, you would 
not know what to do with it; you would only feel burdened, 
worrying about everything. Study the lives of princes and men 
of the world; see how they were vexed." We are like puppets in 
the hands of destiny,- but the man who is one with the Light of 
the world, who has nothing and yet has everything, is a happy 
man. He who is one with God is not afraid of anything, even 
annihilation of the body. Jesus said: "Destroy this temple, and 
in three days I will raise it up."+ 
The  church  has become  a beggar. Ironically,  money  is 
needed in the development of all good works, including those 
performed by the church. The dollar itself has no brains; it can 
serve both good and evil schemes. To seek money to spread 
God's work is righteous action. Money thus used is doing good. 
And the more one sacrifices for God's work, the greater will be 
his reward. 
All Churches Should Be Hives of God-Communion 
Every church does good, and for that I love them all. They 
will truly fulfill their high calling when they become places of 
God-communion. They should be like hives, filled with the 
honey of God-realization.  Unless this truth becomes  more 
manifest in religion, you will see that the church as such will 
gradually disappear.  Religion will be practised in  secluded 
spots out-of-doors, where God can come to those few devoted 
souls who really want to know Him. This has happened in In-
dia. Some of her temples have become not so much places of 
* "Only that yogi who possesses the inner Bliss, who rests on the inner Founda-
tion, who is one with the inner Light, becomes one with Spirit. He attains com-
plete liberation in Spirit (even while living in the body)" (Bhagavad Gita V:24). 
t John 2:19. 

SELF-REALIZATION:  CRITERION  OF  RELIGION  117 
meditation for divine communion as mere gathering places for 
pigeons and people. Real seekers in India gather under the trees 
to  meditate  on  God.  More  and  more  this  will  happen  in 
churches everywhere. The dissatisfaction of real truth seekers 
with dogmatism, and the emptiness of organization  without 
individual Self-realization, will force a great world change in 
the concept of religion. 
Scientific Methods Needed to Follow the First Commandment 
"Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and 
with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy 
mind-, and thy neighbour  as thyself."*  These two command-
ments sum up the whole purpose of religion. If you sincerely 
love God you will do only what is based upon truth. Your love 
will not allow you to err against Him. Bring in the light, and 
darkness will vanish as though it had never been. Bring in love 
of God and the darkness of ignorance flies away. The science of 
yoga explains the truth behind the first commandment,  and 
gives definite scientific techniques that enable the devotee to 
attain the divine communion necessary in order to love God so 
completely. Behind each part of these commandments is a deep 
metaphysical truth: 
"Love the Lord...with  all thy heart":  It is God who has 
given you the power to love your family and friends.  Why 
should you not use that power to love Him as you love your 
dearest ones on earth? You should be able to say: "My Lord, I 
love You as the father loves the child, as the lover loves the 
beloved, as the friend loves the friend, as the master loves the 
servant. I love You with the strength of all human loves, for 
Thou art my Father, my Mother, my Friend, my Master,  my 
Beloved." When you truly love God with all your heart, you 
feel that love for Him day and night. 
As I was leaving home to seek God I was inwardly torn by 
the conflict of loyalties. My father had done everything for me, 
and the whole family was crying over my imminent departure; 
but the love of God was stronger, and I was able to overcome 
the limitations of familial love. 
Many human beings say "I love you" one day and reject 
* Luke  10:27 (Bible). 

118  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
you the next. That is not love. One whose heart is filled with 
the love of God cannot willfully hurt anyone. When you love 
God without reservation, He fills your heart with His uncon-
ditional love for all. That love no human tongue can describe. 
"...and with all thy soul":  You cannot fulfill this part of 
the commandement unless you know your soul. You know it 
in an unconscious way each night, for in deep sleep you are 
aware only of existing; you have no consciousness of being ei-
ther man or woman. You are soul. You can consciously know 
your  soul—your  true self—by  meditation.  And when  you 
know yourself as soul you will have discovered the presence 
of God within  you. The  moon's  reflection  cannot  be  seen 
clearly in ruffled water, but when the water's surface is calm a 
perfect reflection of the moon appears. So with the mind: when 
it is calm you see clearly reflected the mooned face of the soul. 
As souls we are reflections of God. When by meditation tech-
niques we withdraw restless thoughts from the lake of the 
mind, we behold our soul, a perfect reflection of Spirit, and re-
alize that the soul and God are One. 
"...and  with all thy strength":  This aspect of the  com-
mandment is highly scientific. It means withdrawing all your 
strength—all  your energies  and consciousness—into  their 
source, which is God. Yoga teaches you how to control your 
life energies and transmute them from body-consciousness into 
God-consciousness. 
"...and with all thy mind":  When you are praying to God, 
your attention and concentration should be wholly on Him. 
You should not be thinking about your Sunday dinner or your 
work or any other worries and desires. The Lord knows your 
thoughts. Krishna said: "Whenever the fickle and restless mind 
wanders away—for whatever reason—let the yogi withdraw it 
from those distractions and return it to the sole control of the 
Self."* When I pray to God, my mind stays riveted on Him. If 
you develop that calm intensity of concentration you will find 
that a time comes when no matter what else you are doing, 
days and nights pass with your mind inwardly absorbed in 
God. 
* Bhagavad Gita VI:26. 

SELF-REALIZATION:  CRITERION  OF  RELIGION  119 
"...and  thy neighbour  as thyself":  The ordinary man is 
incapable of loving others in this way. Self-centered in  the 
consciousness of "I, me, and mine," he has not yet discovered 
the omnipresent God who resides in him and in all other be-
ings. To me there is no difference between one person and an-
other,- I behold all as soul-reflections of the one God.* I can't 
think of anyone as a stranger, for I know that we are all part of 
the One Spirit. When you experience the true meaning of reli-
gion, which is to know God, you will realize that He is your 
Self, and that He exists equally and impartially in all beings. 
Then you will be able to love others as your own Self. 
Self-realization Converts Conviction into Experience 
Truth alone should be the binding force of religion. Truth 
I have brought to you through Self-Realization Fellowship [Yo-
goda Satsanga Society of India]. This work is spreading because 
of the wisdom and blessings of the God-realized masters behind 
it. All over the country I have seen wonderful students who are 
held to this spiritual path for one reason: Self-realization. My 
only plan to hold people is by their own Self-realization. That 
is the only way I wish to hold them. If there are hundreds in 
my classes, all right; if there are empty seats, it is all right. I 
never wish for anything. I would rather have a few real souls 
than hundreds without sincerity. The great purpose behind this 
movement is to give people their own Self-realization.  When 
people will realize that it is their duty and privilege to know 
God, then a new era will come on earth. Scriptures,  sermons, 
and lectures eventually cease to satisfy the seeker who truly 
longs to feel the presence of God; but when he realizes  truth, 
he knows life as it should be. 
Practise the truth you hear and read about, so that it is not 
just an idea but a conviction born of experience. If reading 
books on theology satisfies your desire for God, you have not 
grasped the purpose of religion. Do not settle for intellectual 
satisfaction about truth. Convert truth into experience,  and 
The experience of Paramahansa Yogananda here described is spoken of in the 
®hagavad Gita (VI:9): "He is a supreme yogi who regards with equal-minded-
°ess all men—patrons, friends, enemies, strangers, mediators, hateful beings, 
relatives, the virtuous and the ungodly." 

120  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
you will know God through your own Self-realization. 
Practise Truth—Meditate—for  God-Communion 
What is needed is spiritual experience. Only divine com-
munion can remove the great boredom that exists when one is 
not following the spiritual path scientifically. What is neces-
sary in order to have that spiritual experience? The habit of 
daily meditation. God is realizable. You can know Him now, 
through meditation. Then without any question, without any 
doubt, without a speck of mental reservation you can say: "I 
am with God." Why not? He is your own. 
The time has come for man to know truth for himself. 
That which I am giving to you is self-realizable. To some the 
Self-Realization  Fellowship  [Yogoda Satsanga] Lessons  may 
seem just another course of philosophical study, to be added to 
one's library; but those who practise them know their value. 
With every new spiritual instruction I received from Sri Yuk-
teswarji he said, "You must know this truth." And I did. In the 
beginning of my spiritual search in India I had steadfastly re-
fused to join any society because I didn't find in them demon-
strable truth. But when I found my guru and this path, and saw 
through my own experience that it worked, I gave my life to 
this cause. 

The Desire That  Satisfies 
All Desires 
Self-Realization Fellowship International Headquarters, 
Los Angeles, California, October 26, 1939 
The glory of God is great. He is real, and He can be found 
in this life. In men's hearts there are many prayers—for money, 
fame, health—prayers for all manner of things. But the prayer 
that should be first in every heart is the prayer for God's pres-
ence. Silently and surely, as you walk on the path of life, you 
must come to the realization that God is the only object, the 
only goal that will satisfy you,- for in God lies the answer to 
every desire of the heart. 
When you have found it impossible to fulfill some urgent 
wish by your own effort, you turn to God in prayer. Thus every 
prayer that you utter represents a desire. But when you find 
God, all desires vanish, and there is no need for prayer. I don't 
pray. That  may seem  a strange thing to say, but when  the 
Object of your prayer is with you all the time, you no longer 
have need to pray. In fulfillment of the wish or prayer for Him 
lies joy eternal. 
Material desires come through certain mistaken  concep-
tions about the purpose of life. This earth is not our home. The 
scriptures have told us we are children of God, made in His im-
age, and that it is the will of the Divine that we return to our 
Source. What man does not realize is that unless and until he 
goes back to the Source, back to God, he will have to struggle 
to fulfill endless desires. Reflect on that. Man cannot help hav-
ing desires, and it is not a sin to have them; but most human 
longings hamper fulfillment of the supreme desire to return to 
God, hence they are detrimental to man's happiness. Until he 
wants and has God, man will continue to long for whatever 
else he believes will make him happy. But to him who has 
121 

122  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
God, instant fulfillment of all desires comes automatically. 
There are two classes of desires: those that help us to find 
God, and those that obstruct our finding Him. For example, if 
someone hits you, you want to retaliate; but if you overcome 
that  desire by using  the  superior  power of love,  you  have 
applied the action that will help you to find God. All desires 
should be satisfied in the divine way. When you try to satisfy 
them in the worldly way, you only multiply your difficulties. 
If you learn to give every desire to God, He will see to it that 
your good desires are fulfilled and the harmful ones are over-
come. There is no protection greater than your conscience, and 
the divine quality of your good desires. If you but looked  at 
your soul, the all-perfect reflection of God within you, you 
would find all your desires satisfied! In that divine conscious-
ness, having which, no other gain is greater, you would be 
unmoved even if the whole world were given to you; neither 
would praise elate you, nor blame hurt. You would feel only 
the great joy of God within. 
God's Children Should Not Beg 
Always seek the guidance of the Divine in trying to fulfill 
your legitimate desires, because that is the supreme way to 
receive the answers to all your prayers. But one thing you must 
remember: cut out begging from your prayer! Change your old 
attitude of supplication. You should pray to God intimately, as 
His child, which you are. God does not object when you pray 
from your ego,*  as a stranger and a beggar, but you will find 
that your efforts are limited by that consciousness. God does 
not want you to give up your own will power, which is your 
divine birthright as His child. 
Naturally, one should distinguish between reasonable and 
unreasonable prayers or desires. And bear in mind that, once 
you have made this discrimination, whatever good or bad de-
sires you hold on to are bound to be fulfilled. If you cling to 
any evil desires, they will be granted; and you will find out 
what harm and unhappiness they cause. As time goes on, you 
will realize that even though your wish was fulfilled,  your 
* The ego consciousness; identification with the mortal body, which creates a 
feeling of separateness from Cod, and hence a feeling of limitation. 

THE DESIRE THAT SATISFIES ALL DESIRES  123 
heart is still not satisfied; you will feel something within you 
rebelling. For example, suppose you have weak digestion, yet 
you want to eat fried foods. Not surprisingly, you suffer every 
time you do. Although you feel delight while fulfilling that de-
sire, the aftereffect is pain; thus you are made aware that you 
have done wrong. It is wiser to use discrimination to separate 
your evil desires from your good ones and, having done so, to 
avoid the  fulfillment  of those  wrong desires.  Learn  to  be 
guided by your conscience, the divine discriminative power 
within you. 
The Danger of Unfulfilled Desires 
Unfulfilled desires remain in the heart. And what is the 
harm in harbouring them? It is this: Every desire consists of 
specific forces, either good or evil, or a mixture of both. And 
when you die, though your body is gone, those forces do not 
die. As mental tabloids they follow your soul wherever it goes, 
and when you are reborn, these tabloids manifest as behav-
ioural tendencies. Thus, a person who has died an alcoholic 
brings with him the tendency to alcoholism when he is re-
bron and it remains with him until he overcomes desire for 
;
alcohol. 
The behaviour of even the smallest child reveals certain 
characteristics of past lives. Some children have terrible tem-
per tantrums,- others are moody. God did not make them that 
way. Unfulfilled desires of past lives fashioned those psycho-
logical tendencies,- and, because of them, the soul, even though 
made in the image of God, appears as something different. If 
the image of God within you is distorted in this life by anger 
or fear, and you do not conquer such uncharacteristic qualities 
now, you will be reborn with them; and you will have the bur-
den of these misery-creating tendencies until you overcome 
them in some future incarnation. 
It is better, therefore, to work out or overcome all your de-
sires now. They would be finished immediately and for all time 
in the supreme joy of God's presence; but until you know Him, 
your unconquered desires will remain to hound you. 
There are two ways of finishing your desires—by realiz-
ing, through reason and discrimination, or wisdom, that only 

124  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
God can give permanent unalloyed happiness; and by fulfill-
ment. In many cases desires lie hidden within the subconscious. 
You think they are finished, but they are not. Life is indeed a 
great mystery,- but the mystery clears away when you dissect 
life with the scalpel of reason. If every day you sit quietly for 
a little while and analyse yourself, you will discover that you 
have many unsatisfied desires. They are like dangerous germs 
that you carry through life, and wherever you go, in this life 
or the next, they will go with you. 
The best course is to do away with all dangerous desires 
in this life, by discrimination, and to concentrate on fulfilling 
your good desires. If you feel drawn to commit suicide, or to 
do something evil, get rid of such desires now. Convince your-
self, by reason and by good actions, that you are a child of God, 
made in His image, and rise above your moods and bodily 
habits. Be more detached. In this way you will conquer. If you 
suffer from a chronic ailment, try mentally to separate your-
self from the consciousness of the body. By discrimination you 
can conquer the senses. Discrimination is the fire that burns 
up desire. 
It is a general practice to store in the attic all of one's un-
wanted, unnecessary "junk," and once in a while to have a 
good housecleaning. Similarly, hidden away in the attic of your 
subconscious mind are many potentially harmful desires that 
one day may give you great trouble. It is important, therefore, 
to analyse yourself. Perhaps you are a hateful or moody or an-
gry type of person. If so, these stored traits are the result of 
your own past behaviour. In order to clean out your mental at-
tic of such unwanted furnishings, you must vigorously employ 
constructive, positive, loving action. 
Love Thine Enemies 
Suppose that even though an old enemy dies, you con-
tinue to feel hatred toward him. In time that bitterness will 
produce ill effects in your own body and mind. It is better to 
concentrate on trying to behold God in your enemy,- for by 
doing so you release yourself from evil vengeful desires that 
destroy your peace of mind. By heaping hatred upon hatred, 
or giving hate in return for hate, you not only increase your 

THE DESIRE THAT SATISFIES ALL DESIRES  125 
enemy's  hostility  toward  you;  you  poison  your  system, 
physically as well as emotionally, with your own venom. 
Conscience Will Tell You What You Are 
Sometimes one feels a desire to "take it easy." This is not 
wrong; to get away from everything now and then gives a per-
son a chance to think what life is all about. Most people are 
floating along on the current of custom and fashion. They have 
never actually lived their own life; they have lived the life of 
the world, and where has it gotten them? So it is wise now and 
then to remove yourself from everyday considerations,- to calm 
your mind and try to understand what kind of person you are 
and what kind of person you want to be. And remember, the 
truest testimony you can find is the testimony of your own 
conscience,  the discriminative voice of the soul.  Whatever 
your conscience says, that is what you are. Think of the power 
of the conscience of Jesus. His accusers spat upon him and cru-
cified him and yet he said, "Father, forgive them." That kind 
of discrimination is the only power that will bring light on 
your path. Whenever there is an overwhelming desire in your 
heart to pray for a certain thing, use your discrimination. Ask 
yourself, "Is it a good desire or a bad desire for which I seek ful-
fillment?" 
Man's Lost Treasure Is God 
There are many influences that nourish desires in you. 
When you see a new model car, you want one. When you see a 
new model house, you want one. Some new style of apparel 
comes out and immediately you yearn to wear that fashion. 
Whence do these desires come? I used to sit for hours ponder-
ing this. Can you classify all your desires? I sorted mine, and 
kept only the good ones; and when I had the contact of God, I 
found all those good desires at once fulfilled. Today you wish 
for one thing and tomorrow you hanker after something else. 
Your mind, having descended from almighty God, is not satis-
fied with the offerings of this world; and it will never be satis-
fied, because you have lost your soul's richest treasure, which 
alone can satisfy all your desires, and that is God. 
It is true there are some good and necessary desires, and 

126  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
you  should  strive  to  fulfill  them.  But  never  forget,  while 
pursuing your little desires, to satisfy first your supreme de-
sire—for God. Belief in the necessity of fulfilling lesser desires 
and duties first is man's greatest delusion. I well remember 
that during my training as a young disciple of my guru, Swami 
Sri Yukteswarji, I kept promising myself daily, "I will meditate 
longer tomorrow." A whole year slipped by before I realized 
that I was still putting it off. At once I made a resolution that 
first thing in the morning I would clean my body and then 
meditate long. But even then, as soon as I stirred about I be-
came caught up in my daily duties and activities. Thereupon I 
resolved to have my meditation first. Thus I learned a great les-
son: First comes my duty to God, and then I take care of all 
lesser duties. Why not? God says,  "Why should I open the 
doors of eternity to you, when you put other duties before 
Me?" If you are not soaring to the heights of Spirit, of what 
account are you? You have nothing to offer God or man. 
So seek Him first. To give more importance to your earthly 
duties is false reasoning, because at any moment the angel 
Gabriel may call you—at any moment you may be taken away 
from here. Why then give so much importance to life? for life 
is very peculiar. You think you are quite secure. Suddenly a 
loved one dies, or you lose your health, and all security van-
ishes. How I loved my mother and thought she would be with 
me always, and suddenly I found she was gone!*  Don't  be 
afraid of death, but be prepared for it. 
Life is not what it seems to be. Don't trust it, for it is very 
tricky, and full of disappointments. Perfection was not meant 
to be found here. I am not giving you a false picture of life. This 
is not the kingdom of God; it is God's laboratory, where He is 
testing souls to see if they will overcome evil desires by good 
ones, and make Him their supreme desire, so they can return 
home to His kingdom. 
Take God, Not Life, Seriously 
Life is full of tragedy and comedy, a kaleidoscope of infi-
nite variety. No two things are the same. Everyone's life is 
* Paramahansa  Yogananda  was  not  yet  eleven  when  his  mother  died. 
(Publisher's  Note) 

THE DESIRE THAT SATISFIES ALL  DESIRES  127 
individual. Each person has a different kind of face, a different 
kind of mind and desires. We would become bored if we had ex-
actly the same experiences every day,- we would soon tire of 
life. Were heaven itself the same every day, we wouldn't want 
it. We enjoy variety. The stereotyped conception of heaven is 
all wrong. If it were boring, all the saints would pray to come 
back to earth for a little change! Heaven is something infinitely 
different, ever pleasantly new, whereas earth is often unpleas-
antly new! 
Yet, no matter how trying life is, most people become ac-
customed to it and assume there is no other way to live. Not 
being able to compare this life with the spiritual life, they do 
not realize how painful and boring earthly living is. 
Actually, life is not real; it is only an entertainment. And 
just as old movies are shown over and over, so basically the 
same old incidents occur and recur in life. And although life 
will go on eternally, the same themes depicted in past films 
will be portrayed again and again. It is true that history repeats 
itself. We are all museum pieces! 
Whatever comes in life, just take it joyfully, impersonally, 
as you would a motion picture. Life is entertaining when we do 
not take it too seriously. A good laugh is an excellent remedy 
for human i!is. One of the best characteristics of the American 
people is their ability to laugh. To be able to laugh at life is 
marvellous. This my master [Swami Sri Yukteswar] taught me. 
In the beginning of my training in his hermitage, I went about 
with a solemn face, never smiling. One day Master pointedly 
remarked, "What is this? Are you attending a funeral cere-
mony? Don't you know that finding God is the funeral of all 
sorrows? Then why so glum? Don't  take this life too seri-
ously." He taught me that one must be mentally above every 
crucifixion of earthly experience in order to find complete hap-
piness in God. 
Krishna taught: "Even-minded during happiness and sor-
row, profit and loss, triumph and failure—so encounter the 
battle of life! Thus thou wilt not acquire sin."*  To remain 
evenminded, no matter what comes, is one of the best ways to 
* Bhagavad Gita 11:38. 

128  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
conquer delusive desires. This I learned from the example of 
my great master—even  to the last, changeless.  Christ  also 
demonstrated  that  spirit.  Even  though  Jesus was  tortured, 
God's love was not taken away; he did not lose his divine con-
sciousness. God's protection of our joy and peace is the great-
est fortress possible. Throughout all trials and suffereings, re-
member the good things that God has given you. Your soul is 
a divine temple of God. The darkness of mortal ignorance and 
limitations must be driven out of that temple. It is wonderful 
to be in the consciousness of the soul—fortified, strong! 
Be afraid of nothing. Hating none, giving love to all, feel-
ing the love of God, seeing His presence in everyone, and hav-
ing but one desire—for His constant presence in the temple of 
your consciousness—that  is the way to live in this  world. 
Those who have other desires will not know true satisfaction. 
Environment Shapes Our Desires 
Desires are formed according to one's environment;  they 
are created by, and therefore limited by, your sense perceptions. 
Attending a country fair satisfies a desire for a little  excite-
ment; but after you have been to a world fair and viewed all the 
different exhibits, a small fair no longer holds any attraction. 
This illustrates the importance of having communion  with 
God now, for the comparison with inferior earthly joys,- then 
your desires will be of a much higher and more advanced na-
ture. The desire to be one with God is the greatest of all. When 
you are through with any lesser desire, you soon pick up an-
other, but when you have God, all other desires are satisfied 
completely. "Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his right-
eousness; and all these things shall be added unto you."*  Why 
not fulfill first this highest desire? for when He answers your 
prayer to know Him, all other desires will be instantly fulfilled 
throughout eternity. 
Perhaps you feel that you have no desires. Well, I have of-
ten noticed what happens when people go shopping. They may 
have  no particular  desire  to  buy,  but  suddenly  something 
catches their eye and they think, "I must have it!" Day and 
night that object is on their mind, and finally they buy it, even 
* Matthew  6:33 (Bible). 

THE DESIRE THAT SATISFIES ALL  DESIRES  129 
if they have to borrow the money. Then, after having it for a 
while, their happiness in it grows stale, and they want some-
thing else. We meet people who say, "If only I could have a 
thousand dollars (or a car, or a swimming pool)," and when that 
wish is satisfied, they yearn for something different. Human 
desires are not perfect, hence their fulfillment does not lead to 
perfect happiness. 
The world environment will try to prevent you from re-
membering that the only worthwhile desire is to have God. But 
every day you should remind yourself of this. And when you 
have made up your mind not to smoke, or eat unwisely, or lie 
or cheat, be firm in these good desires; don't weaken. Wrong 
environment saps your will and invites wrong desires. Live 
with thieves and you think that is the only life. But live with 
divine persons, and after having divine communion, no other 
desires can tempt you. All become stale. Therefore even a few 
moments of deep meditation, or the company of a saint, will 
be a raft of inspiration to carry you across this ocean of delu-
sion to the shores of God. 
Be Safe in the Castle of God's Presence 
Joy lies in continually thinking of God. The longing for 
Him should be constant. A time comes when your mind never 
wanders away, when not even the greatest affliction of body, 
mind, and soul can take your consciousness from the living 
presence of God. Is that not wonderful? to live and think and 
feel God all the time? to remain in the castle of His presence, 
whence death nor aught else can take you away? "On Me fix 
thy mind, be thou My devotee, with ceaseless worship bow 
reverently before Me. Having thus united thyself to Me as thy 
Highest Goal, thou shalt be Mine own."* When you are proof 
against all desires, you are enjoying the Presence Eternal. 
This life is strange. Everything is subject to change. That 
is why one should not anchor his happiness on this life. Our 
time will pass on,- what you are seeing now will be gone one 
day. Change is good if you don't let it hurt you. When it does 
hurt, the rebellion you feel is meant to show you that you 
should not have any desires. When you are anchored in that 
* Bhagavad Gita EX:34. 

