The Divine Art of Making Friends 
First Self-Realization Fellowship Temple at 
Encinitas, California, January 22, 1939 
Friendship is the noblest human expression of God's desire 
to show His love to man. God showers affection on the baby 
through the father and mother; their feeling for the infant is in-
born, because our Creator has ordained that our parents can't 
help but love us. But friendship comes to us a free,  impartial 
expression of His love.* 
Two strangers meet, and by an instantaneous  choice of 
their  hearts  they  wish  to  help  each  other.  Have  you  ever 
analysed how this happens? The spontaneous mutual desire to 
be friends comes directly from God's divine law of attraction-
cumulative mutual acts of friendship between two souls in 
past lives gradually create a karmic bond that irresistibly at-
tracts them to each other in this life. 
So long as it is uncontaminated by selfishness or attraction 
to the opposite sex, this impulse is pure. But often it is tainted. 
Friendship grows on the tree of our innermost feelings; it is 
desecrated by unwholesome desires and selfish actions. If you 
put the wrong kind of fertilizer on the roots of a tree, the fruit 
that develops will be poor; and when you feed the tree of hu-
man feeling with the emotion of selfishness, your unworthy 
motives will blemish the fruit of friendship. To feel interested 
in someone just because he is rich or influential and can do 
something for you is not friendship. And to be attracted  to 
someone primarily because that person has a beautiful face is 
not friendship. When that face loses its youthful attractiveness, 
the "friendship" will evaporate. 
* "He finds peace who knows Me.. .as the Infinite Lord of Creation, and as the 
Good Friend of all creatures" (Bhagavad Gita V:29). 
155 

156  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
Develop Friendships from the Past 
It is true that you cannot find friendship everywhere. Some 
persons you see every day and never know, and others you feel 
you have known always. You should learn to recognize that in-
ner cue. Wherever you are, always keep your eyes open, and if 
you feel divinely attracted to someone, you should develop 
friendship with that person because he has been your friend in 
some life before. There are many friends whom we have known 
in past lives, but those friendships have not yet been perfected. 
It is better to start building on a foundation that has already 
been laid than to dig for a foundatin on the sands of temporary 
acquaintances. It is easy for one to think he has many friends, 
until  they do something hurtful  to him,  and then he feels 
deeply disillusioned. 
Many people make mistakes in choosing friends because 
they are deluded by outer appearances. The only way to recog-
nize real friends is to meditate more. You should try to find 
friends the divine way, and that is to purge your consciousness 
of all thought of facial or other appearances as factors in deter-
mining your feelings about others. If you do this, one day you 
will be able to discover true friends all around you. You will 
feel God's friendship through those humble human channels 
that do not resist Him. Through the pure of heart the divine 
light of friendship will flow to you. 
To Attract Friends, Improve Your Character 
You cannot attract true friends without removing from 
your own character the stains of selfishness and other unlovely 
qualities. The greatest art of making friends is to behave di-
vinely yourself—to be spiritual, to be pure, to be unselfish— 
and to start friendship where the foundation of friendship has 
already been laid in a past life. 
Friendship should exist in all human relations: between 
parents and children, between husbands and wives, between 
men and men, between women and women, and between men 
and women. It is unconditional. When you have the impulse to 
befriend others, it is the presence of God that you feel. Friend-
ship is a divine impulse. God is not satisfied to look after His 
human children only in the guise of parents and other relatives. 

THE DIVINE ART OF MAKING  FRIENDS  157 
He comes as friends to give us opportunities to express uncon-
ditional love from our hearts. 
The more your human shortcomings drop away arid divine 
qualities come into your life, the more friends you will have. 
Was not Lord Jesus a great friend to all, and Lord Buddha, and 
Lord Krishna? To be like them you must perfect your love for 
others. When you can convince others of your friendship; when 
you are sure, through the tests of time and many shared expe-
riences, that a person really feels for you from the soul, and you 
feel for that person in the same way—not for any gain, but 
solely because of the divine impulse of friendship—you will 
behold in that relationship the reflection of God. 
Give Friendship to All, As God Does 
Do not allow your friendship to remain locked up in one 
person, but gradually establish this divine relationship with 
others of noble ideals. If you try to build friendship with a 
wrong-minded person you will be disillusioned. Be friends first 
with the truly good, then go on being a friend to others until 
you can feel friendship toward everyone, until you can say: "I 
am a friend to all, even my enemies." Even toward those who 
were crucifying him, Jesus felt only friendship, exemplifying in 
his final ordeal that which he had always taught: ".. .Love your 
enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate 
you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and perse-
cute you."* 
True friendship is divine love, for it is unconditional and 
it is real and lasting. Emerson beautifully expressed this ideal 
in one of his essays:+ "The highest compact we can make with 
our fellow is—'Let  there be truth between us two forever-
more.' .. .It is sublime to feel and say of another, I need never 
meet or speak or write to him, we need not reinforce ourselves 
or send tokens of remembrance; I rely on him as on myself, if 
he did thus or thus, I know it was right." You can talk freely 
with a friend without being misunderstood. But friendship can 
never develop if there is any hint of demand of one on the 
other. Friendship can be built only on a basis of freedom and 
* Matthew  5:44. 
t Conduct  of Life:  Behaviour. 

158  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
spiritual equality. Therefore you should treat everyone in that 
divine light, in the consciousness that each person is an image 
of God. If you mistreat someone you will never know friend-
ship with him. 
Many people go through life without friends. I can't imag-
ine how they are able to carry on. Real friends seldom misun-
derstand us, and if they do it is only for a little while. Should 
someone abuse your trust, go on giving love and understanding 
just the same, as you would hope to receive it. But if that per-
son continues to behave spitefully, and goes on slapping the ex-
tended hand of friendship, then it is better to withhold your 
hand for a time. 
Universal Friendship Starts at Home 
Friendship should start at home. If in your family there is 
one who is particularly in harmony with you, develop friend-
ship with that person first. Then, if you feel drawn to someone 
of similar ideals among your acquaintances, develop that rela-
tionship. Banish all desires born of selfishness or sex compul-
sion. In giving pure friendship you will see the guidance of 
God. Develop friendship with good people, and the more you 
meditate the more you will recognize friends of the past. Med-
itation awakens "sleeping memories of friends once more to 
be."* Many persons whom I had seen in vision, I later met; and 
here in America I have found many whom I saw in vision on 
the ship as I was first coming to this country in 1920. 
Friendship is a great universal force. When your desire for 
friendship is strong enough, though an unknown person who 
is spiritually attuned to you be living at the South Pole, the 
magnetism of friendship will nevertheless draw you together. 
Only selfishness can destroy this magnetism within us. He 
who thinks of himself all the time wrecks friendship. Such per-
sons cannot attract friends, because they are unable to expand 
and receive the good in life. 
God gave you a family so that you may learn how to love 
others, and then give that kind of love to all. Our dear ones are 
* From  "On Coming to the New-Old Land—America,"  by  Paramahansa 
Yogananda, in Songs of the Soul. (Publisher's  Note) 

THE DIVINE ART OF MAKING  FRIENDS  159 
taken away from us by death and other circumstances that we 
may learn not to love persons in merely human relationships, 
but to be in love with Love Itself, which is God, the Being be-
hind all human masks. "When a man beholds all separate be-
ings as existent in the One that has expanded Itself into the 
many, he merges with Brahman."* 
Friendship means investing your love where there is no 
prejudice of human relations. In married life there is the com-
pulsion of sex, and in family life there is the compulsion of 
hereditary instincts. But in friendship there is no compulsion. 
Let us give our love to all. Let us pray that we meet our 
friends of the past and prove our friendship with them, so that 
we can finally understand and merit the friendship of God. Un-
less we are united with all of His children through a spirit of 
friendliness, we will not be united with God. 
I know no strangers. What a great state of happiness and 
joy! Even the worst enemy cannot make me feel that I am not 
his friend. When that awakening comes, you are in love with 
all. You see that everyone is your Father's child, and the love 
you feel for all beings never dies. It grows, increasing until you 
realize, in the love of friends, the divine love of God. 
* Bhagavad Gita XIII:30. 

The True  Experience 
of Spiritual  Ecstasy 
Self-Realization Fellowship International Headquarters, 
Los Angeles, California, December 16, 1934 
God has given us the power of spiritual inspiration—real-
ization of the pure bliss of His presence within us. But the evil 
force in creation has invented spurious imitations. The  tem-
porarily exhilarating effects of alcohol and drugs are counter-
feits of true spiritual experiences. The use of alcohol and drugs 
frequently leads to overindulgence in sex, which shuts out the 
power of spiritual inspiration by tying the mind to  intense 
body-consciousness. 
Many people take wine to banish sad or unpleasant mem-
ories and worries, but that kind of forgetfulness robs man of his 
native soul wisdom—the very power by which he was meant 
to overcome his trials and to find lasting happiness. God, being 
Joy Itself, wants us to seek and to find, within our souls, His 
ever-new bliss. 
The  counterfeits  are harmful, for they are the lures of 
maya, the cosmic delusive force that is ever trying to mar all 
the beautiful expressions of God in this universe. Throughout 
creation we see the dual forces of good and evil opposing each 
other: God created love, the satanic force created hate;  God 
created kindness, the satanic force created selfishness;  God 
created peace, the satanic force created disharmony. 
Knowing this, you should realize that alcohol and drugs are 
detrimental to your happiness; they obliterate the real joy and 
intelligence of your soul. Even one drink, or one indulgence in 
drugs* may start a permanent habit, because there may be such 
* Except when prescribed as necessary by a reputable medical doctor, and 
taken under his supervision. 
160 

THE TRUE EXPERIENCE  OF SPIRITUAL  ECSTASY  161 
a tendency already imbedded in your subconsciousness from 
past lives. What is evil should always be shunned as evil. 
The Wine of Spiritual Ecstasy Is Incomparable 
Once you have tasted the wine of spiritual ecstasy, you 
will find that no other experience can compare with it. Ever 
strive to establish the divine consciousness in your children by 
teaching them to meditate, that they be not tempted to play 
with the fire of delusive counterfeit joys. Sacred bliss is never-
ending, but the pleasures that come from alcohol and drugs are 
short-lasting and ultimately bring misery. 
Every night in sleep you have a taste of peace and joy. 
While you are in deep slumber, God makes you live in the tran-
quil superconsciousness, in which all the fears and worries of 
this existence are forgotten. By meditation you can experience 
that holy state of mind when you are awake, and be constantly 
immersed in healing peace. 
When the divine joy comes, immediately my breath is still 
and I am lifted into the Spirit. I feel the bliss of a thousand 
sleeps rolled into one, and yet I don't lose my ordinary aware-
ness. This is universally the experience of those who go deep 
in the superconscious state. When the profound ecstasy of God 
falls over you, the body becomes absolutely still, the breath 
ceases to flow, and the thoughts are quiet—banished,  every 
one, by the magic command of the soul. Then you drink of 
God's bliss and experience an intoxication of joy that not a 
thousand draughts of wine could give you. 
As the ordinary person drowses on the borderline of sleep, 
he feels a little happiness, but he quickly loses that awareness 
and is fast asleep. Sleep is not total unconsciousness, for when 
you awaken, you always know whether you slept well or not. 
There are various kinds of sleep—some light and some 
deep. But more intoxicating than even the most blissful slum-
ber are those spiritual experiences one may have consciously 
with God. Beyond the mysteries of the sleepland lie all these 
divine joys. I can remain in any state I wish to. Often I stay be-
tween the sleepland and the awareness of the world—in the su-
perconscious state. 

162  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
Consciousness Has a Limitless Span 
Your mind has a vast, a limitless, span; but you do not re-
alize it. I can go into the depths of sleep and enjoy the sleep 
state and at the same time be with the world. Or I can sleep 
and dream, and at the same time also hear everything that is 
going on around me. Sometimes I sleep just as the ordinary per-
son does, and again I can sleep and consciously watch myself 
sleeping. In the superconscious  state you can see that your 
body and mind are sleeping and yet have total awareness of all 
happenings. This is possible only when you have developed the 
ability to enter at will the superconsciousness,  and return at 
will to the ordinary state of mind. 
You need never worry that by meditation (or by imagina-
tion or by the practise of inner silence) you may go out of the 
body and fail to return. That idea is entirely false. The maya-
induced attachment to the body is so powerful that you can't 
escape from it that easily! Even if your ordinary waking aware-
ness is obliterated, so long as your subconscious mind remains 
tied to the body you cannot leave it permanently. 
What Is the Proof of Self-realization? 
If you imagine something very strongly, it becomes visible 
as a hallucination, having no intrinsic reality. You should un-
derstand the difference between imagination and Self-realiza-
tion. The essential  proof of Self-realization—of  God's  con-
sciousness  in you—is to be truly and unconditionally  happy. 
If you are receiving more and more joy in meditation, without 
cessation, you may know that God is making manifest  His 
presence in you. If there is a break in the flow of divine happi-
ness, then there is something wrong in your  consciousness, 
some kink that needs to be removed with the help of your 
guru. By maintaining steady communion with him,  through 
daily meditation and by following his precepts—the sadhana* 
he has given you—he will straighten out that kink for you. 
You cannot be with the Lord just by thinking you are di-
vinely enlightened. You must improve yourself—you  must 
* The path of spiritual discipline and instruction given to one by his guru. (See 
glossary.) 

THE TRUE EXPERIENCE  OF SPIRITUAL  ECSTASY  163 
perfect yourself. There is a lot of difference between the poten-
tial realization of God and the actual realization of God. You 
can never know Him except through humbleness,  wisdom, 
and devotion. The humble man is the one who will know God. 
Those who go deep in the superconsciousness  automati-
cally develop unusual spiritual powers, and control over nat-
ural forces. But no man of true God-consciousness  ever uses 
his powers unwisely, for egotistical display. Sages realize that 
the Lord is the Sole Doer, and humbly return to Him the ex-
traordinary gifts He has bestowed on them. Is not everything 
in the universe a miracle? By his mere existence is not man a 
miracle? If human beings are not satisfied with all the wonders 
that God has created, why should His saints perform further 
miracles?  They never do, unless—for  some special  reason, 
often an unfathomable one—the Lord so commands them. 
Beyond the Kaleidoscope of Subconsciousness 
I will illustrate how the superconsciousness differs from 
the  subconsciousness.  The  superconscious  is  that  state  in 
which you can consciously,  during wakefulness or sleep, pro-
duce any sensatin in your body at will, without any external 
stimulus. That is the proof. In the subconscious  dreamland 
you can drink a glass of hot milk, but this experience comes to 
you unbidden; in the superconscious state you can create that 
or any other experience consciously and at will. Unless you 
are  able  to  do this,  do not  delude  yourself  that  you  have 
reached superconsciousness. 
Millions of devotees never get beyond the kaleidoscope of 
the subconscious mind, which manifests its wonders  mostly 
during sleep. But in the superconscious state you can see or 
know anything that you wish to—not by imagination but in 
reality. I can sit in this chair and transfer my mind to India and 
see exactly what is going on in my old home there. 
The advancing devotee progresses through three stages of 
spiritual awareness, the Sacred Trinity: First he experiences su-
perconsciousness, oneness with the creative power in creation: 
Aum, "God the Holy Ghost." Next comes Christ  Conscious-
ness [Kutastha Chaitanya], merging in the Infinite Intelligence 
within creation: Tat, "God the Son." Finally, he attains  the 

164  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
highest, Cosmic Consciousness, the Truth beyond creation, the 
ineffable Absolute: Sat, "God the Father." 
Sometimes  a devotee  dwells  in  the  subconsciousness, 
sometimes he is lifted to superconsciousness  and to Christ 
Consciousnes,  and a few great souls are able to go beyond 
Christ Consciousness into Cosmic Consciousness, the realm 
of Causeless Spirit. 
In the Christ-conscious state you don't have to visualize 
things first in order to experience them. You don't have to pic-
ture India—you are there; you are aware of all creation. That 
experience is an endless expansion of consciousness. You are 
in the blade of grass and on the mountaintop; and you can feel 
every cell of your body and every atom of space. 
But Cosmic Consciousness is beyond even that. When you 
can feel your presence in all creation, and also know the Joy 
that is beyond creation, then you are a Godlike being. 

Three Paths to 
Cosmic  Consciousness 
Trinity Auditorium, Los Angeles, California, February 9, 1934 
So long as even a little tremor of thought and mental rest-
lessness is present, you cannot reach cosmic  consciousness. 
The Self-Realization [Yogoda Satsanga] Technique of Concen-
tration* helps greatly to improve the quality and power of one's 
concentration. Its practice will save the earnest seeker from 
years of fruitless wandering on the subconscious plane. That 
land you want to avoid; it is full of illusory and imaginative 
spiritual experiences. One must reach the superconscious state 
to have real spiritual experiences and realizations of truth, t 
The world has a habit of much teaching and little practis-
ing. You may hear a lecture on sugar a hundred times, but you 
will not know its flavour until you have tasted it. Neither can 
the glory of any true teaching be known except by practice. You 
have to live the teachings of the prophets and the great ones. 
Then their truths become your own, and you realize that truth 
is demonstrable,  and universal.  When you practise  truth— 
* Concentration is a state of complete one-pointedness and stillness of con-
sciousness. The natute of creation is motion; the nature of Spirit is motion-
lessness. "Be still, and know that I am God" (Psalms 46:10, Bible). Concentra-
tion  is  therefore  essential  to  divine  communion.  The  teachniques  of 
concentration and meditation taught in Yogoda Satsanga Lessons  lead to per-
fect attunement of human consciousness to divine consciousness. (See Con-
centration  Techinique in glossary.) 
t The subconscious level of man's awareness has its usefulness as the reposi-
tory of memory and as the land of sleep and dream. But in meditation it can be 
a real deterrent, luring the absentminded, imaginative, or psychically inclined 
aspirant into a realm of fanciful hallucinations that have no more reality or 
spiritual value than one's ordinary dreams at night. Scientific meditation tech-
niques, and the devotee's own effort to practise them correctly, draw the mind 
instead to the superconscious state of Self-Realization and God-communion. 
165 

166  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
whether you call yourself a Christian, a Hindu, a Buddhist, or a 
devotee of any other religion—Christ will claim you, and so 
will Krishna, Buddha, and all other divine incarnations of Truth. 
Follow the path of truth steadfastly. Remember that out of 
thousands, only a few seek God; and out of those seekers, per-
haps only one really knows Him. * He who is persistent will re-
alize God. So try your best to make meditation a regular expe-
rience in your life. May you never forget God and never be 
satisfied until you have Him! Be able to say, "Behind this finite 
frame I feel the Infinite." I never come to class until I know He 
is with me. I never teach unless I have made that  complete 
communion. And I know that when I talk from that plane stu-
dents will not forget what they have learned. 
Concentration—a Requisite for Finding God 
To be able to concentrate is essential for spiritual progress; 
without concentration you shall never find God. Learn how to 
shut out of your consciousness all sounds and other earthly dis-
tractions. As soon as your consciousness is right, God is there. 
He isn't hiding from you; you are hiding from Him. When in 
deep meditation you see any inner light, t try to hold it, and to 
feel you are inside it, one with it. That is where God is. Try to 
realize you are that light of God. 
The more peace you feel during concentration  and the 
longer you concentrate, the deeper you will go in God. If the 
time given to reading books about spiritual truth were spent in 
meditation,  you would have far greater advancement  both 
mentally and spiritually. Sleep less, and give more hours to 
meditation; the rest you will enjoy is a hundred times more re-
freshing than sleep. 
Unless you can cut off sounds from your consciousness you 
cannot reach God. That is why saints have sought the seclusion 
of caves and forests. Plunge into the inner silence again and 
again by practising the methods of concentration and medita-
* "Among thousands of men, perhaps one strives for spiritual attainment; and, 
among the blessed true seekers that assiduously try to reach Me, perhaps one 
perceives Me as I am" (Bhagavad Gita VH:3). 
t The light of God or the spiritual eye. 

THREE PATHS TO COSMIC  CONSCIOUSNESS  167 
tion I have given you, and you will find great peace and happi-
ness. The Gita says: "Free from ever-hoping desires and from crav-
ings for possessions, with the heart (waves of feeling) controlled 
by the soul (by yoga concentration), retiring alone to a quiet place, 
the yogi should constantly try to unite with the soul."* 
The silence of deep meditation should be practised more 
in all churches and temples. Everyone should talk less. During 
my hermitage training in India my guru, Swami Sri Yukteswar, 
would lecture to us only once in a while. Most of the time we 
sat around him without any talking, and concentrated within. 
If we even stirred, he would reprove us. A real teacher pos-
sesses more than book knowledge, and in spiritual life it is nec-
essary to learn wisdom from such a teacher; one who knows, 
and knows that he knows, because he has  experienced—not 
merely read about—truth. 
The Invisible Source of Visible Worlds 
Space is divided into two parts or aspects. On one side of 
space is creation. On the other side is God alone; creation is 
completely absent. That is the world of the "darkless dark" and 
the "Lightless light." In the Gita the Lord says: "Where no sun 
or moon or fire shines, that is My Supreme Abode  "t 
The same duality is true of human consciousness. Your be-
ing has two sides—one visible, the other invisible. With open 
eyes you behold objective creation, and yourself in it. With 
closed eyes you see nothing a dark void; yet your conscious-
ness, even when dissociated from form, is still keenly aware 
and operative. If in deep meditation you penetrate the darkness 
behind closed eyes, you behold the Light from which all cre-
ation emerges. By deeper samadhi,  your experience transcends 
even the manifested Light and enters the All-Blissful  Con-
sciousness—beyond all form, yet infinitely more real, tangible, 
and joyous than any sensory or supersensory perception. 
God has given you the opportunity to observe in your own 
consciousness the operation of the same laws that govern the 
universe.  The  state of consciousness  without  form  that  is 
experienced with closed eyes may be compared to the endless 
* Bhagavad Gita VI: 10.  t Bhagavad Gita XV:6. 

168  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
region of "darkless dark" and "lightless light," where God ex-
ists without any of the forms, qualities, and dualities that char-
acterize the sphere of His material creation. In this boundless 
stretch of eternity behind creation, God alone lives in the un-
qualified consciousness of ever-existing, ever-conscious, ever-
new Bliss. No world or any other created thing exists in His 
consciousness in that part of infinity where He reigns as the 
Absolute. But on the other side of space He is aware of every-
thing—all creation—in  Himself. 
In the Invisible is the factory of the universe. Einstein said 
that space looks very suspicious, because everything comes out 
of it and everything disappears into it. Whither do electrons 
vanish, and whole worlds? 
Any time you become fascinated by some material  cre-
ation, close you eyes, look within, and contemplate its Source. 
You see nothing, feel nothing. Yet all visible objects have come 
out of that Invisible. "The light shineth in darkness."*  If you 
keep peering into the darkness you will find that great Light. 
Behind the darkness is the Christ Consciousness  [Kutastha 
Chaitanya).  Behind the darkness is the teeming life of other 
worlds. "In my Father's house are many mansions, "t 
Right behind space is Intelligence. And right behind you is 
God. Live no longer in ignorance of His presence. Churn  the 
darkness with your meditation. Don't stop until you find Him. 
There is so much to know! so much to see within! The answer 
to every problem will come to you straight from the Infinite. 
The truths that I perceive within by meditation reveal the ba-
sis of physiological laws that science is discovering by other 
methods. When I close my eyes, I can see the subtle life cur-
rents flowing in my body. 
In  the  quietness  you  experience  when  your  eyes  are 
closed, don't feel you are alone. God is with you. Why should 
you think He is not? The ether is filled with music that  is 
caught by the radio—music  that otherwise you would not 
know about. And so it is with  God. He is with you  every 
minute of your existence, yet the only way to realize this is to 
meditate. And those of you who do meditate should go deeper! 
* John  1:5 (Bible),  t John  14:2 (Bible). 

THREE PATHS TO COSMIC  CONSCIOUSNESS  169 
Don't fall asleep at night until you actually feel some expres-
sion of the presence of God within you. Peer into that dark-
ness until you discover its wondrous secrets. 
For your encouragement I tell you of an experience I had 
today in the superconscious state. I was sitting in the library at 
Mt. Washington. It was about four o'clock. Suddenly my breath 
disappeared. My limbs became rigid. I found myself watching 
the process of death. Breath and movement had left my body, 
yet I was conscious. This experience of death was wonderful. I 
saw my body and all nature as a cosmic motion picture, cre-
ated from God's light. Joyously I cried, "There is no death, 
Lord! This whole world is nothing but a movie!" 
A ruler on his throne may say, "Ah, I am king!" but let 
death give one knock and he is gone. He is a real king who feels 
God in all forms in creation. Death shall not frighten him, be-
cause he beholds it as a portal to the divine kingdom. 
The First Path to Cosmic Consciousness 
Of the three ways to expand human consciousness  into 
cosmic consciousness, the first is the social way, wherein you 
shut out "self" and live for all. Be loyal to your friends, and feel 
love for everyone. God gave you a family that you might ex-
pand your consciousness by caring and doing for others. In fam-
ily life we learn love and self-sacrifice for our loved ones, and 
thus attain some expansion of consciousness. But this is not 
enough. Love that becomes personal is exclusive,  confined; 
when love becomes impersonal, it expands. Develop imper-
sonal love,- be able to give everyone the same love that you be-
stow on your family, and to do for others exactly as you would 
for yourself. The social way to cosmic consciousness is to be-
have toward everyone in this way. 
God loves all His children alike—they are all His divine 
family, and His love is impersonal. His children should give that 
same kind of love to one another. This is the divine plan. To for-
get it is to suffer. The whole world-attitude should change. You 
are everyone, because your true nature is omnipresence. 
I enjoy giving things to others; I feel the greatest happi-
ness in seeing their joy. When we feel for and love others, we 
find that all of creation responds to us. Jesus, who gave up his 

170  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
body "as a ransom for many/'* showed us the social way of at-
taining  cosmic  consciousness.  Christlike,  you  too  should 
serve all men as your Self. 
The man of cosmic consciousness  is a happy man. He 
doesn't limit his love to a few, excluding everyone else. So 
should you make the whole world your own family. Will you 
remember? This consciousness is with me every moment. I 
have no caste, no country—I feel that all are mine. Love all 
men as your brothers, love all women as your sisters, and all 
older people as your parents. Love all human beings as your 
friends. 
The Second Path 
The second way to cosmic consciousness is the way of 
self-discipline. Do not be a victim of immoderation.  Enjoy 
things, but don't be attached to them. Be free. Be pleasant and 
self-controlled. Avoid becoming a slave to wrong habits, and 
act only according to your righteous convictions. To attain cos-
mic consciousness it is necessary to possess self-control and to 
rise  above  dualities—heat  and cold,  pleasure  and  sorrow, 
health and sickness. Learn to endure all things without any ex-
citement  or disturbance  of mind.  "He  who  is  everywhere 
nonattached, neither joyously excited by encountering good, 
nor disturbed by evil, has an established wisdom, "t 
The Third and Highest Path 
Lastly is the way of meditation—the metaphysical path. If 
while meditating you are still conscious of the breath, you are 
tied to body awareness. To enter cosmic consciousness  one 
must free himself from the bonds of the body through guru-
given meditation methods. 
If you put a sealed jar of water in a tank of water, that 
which is in the jar is separated from that which surrounds the 
jar; but if you remove the lid, the water in the jar and the wa-
ter in the tank can mingle. Similarly, ordinary people shut out 
God because their consciousness  is sealed in by the lid of 
ignorance. When that lid is removed by right methods of med-
* Matthew  20:28. 
t Bhagavad Gita 11:57. 

THREE PATHS TO COSMIC  CONSCIOUSNESS  171 
itation, one feels the peace of God inside and outside the body. 
As you increase the length and depth of your meditations you 
will find more and more peace, and an ever-new joy. Whatever 
else you may try, it will not produce the divine consciousness 
that comes from meditation. 
The Lord is all around, but you don't feel Him. And you 
cannot feel Him, within or without, until you remove the lid 
of ignorance and merge your consciousness with His, to dis-
cover Him within yourself. If you sink in material desire you 
will suffocate. If you sink in the ocean of God you will live 
forevermore. 
Once you have found God, you experience real and lasting 
satisfaction. Human friendships may be severed, but God will 
never leave you. Though everyone else forsake you, if you have 
Him, you have everything. 

Be a Smile Millionaire 
Self-Realization Fellowship Temple, 
Hollywood, California, June 5, 1949 
The real smile is the smile of bliss that comes when you 
meditate, when you feel the joy of God's presence. That is the 
smile on Lahiri Mahasaya's*  face. He is seeing the world par-
tially, but seeing God fully. My smile comes from a joy deep 
within my being, a joy that you also may attain. Like a fra-
grance it oozes out from the core of the blossoming soul. This 
joy calls others to bathe in its waters of divine bliss. 
The  average man is familiar with  four states  of  mind. 
When a desire is fulfilled, he is happy. When a desire is denied, 
he is unhappy. When he is neither glad nor sorrowful, he is 
bored.  When  these  three  emotions,  these  three  states  of 
mind—pleasure, pain, and boredom—are sloughed off, he has 
peace. 
Beyond Peace Is Bliss 
Peace is the absence of the alternations of sorrow and plea-
sure, and the absence of boredom. It is a very desirable state. 
After a tumultuous ride on the crests of pain and pleasure, with 
frequent dips into the troughs of boredom, you enjoy floating 
on the calm sea of peace. But greater than peace is bliss—bliss 
of the soul. It is an ever-new joy that never disappears, but re-
mains with your soul through eternity. That joy can be at-
tained only by perceiving God. 
If you place a pot of water under the rays of the moon and 
then agitate the water, you create a distorted reflection of the 
moon. When you still the waves in the pot, the reflection be-
* A reference to the photograph of Lahiri Mahasaya, the guru of Paramahansa 
Yogananda's guru. The unusual circumstances surrounding the taking of this 
photograph are described in Autobiography  of a Yogi, chapter 1. 
172 

BE A SMILE  MILLIONAIRE  173 
comes clear. The time when the water in the pot is quiet and 
clearly reflecting the moon, is comparable to the meditative 
state of peace, and the still deeper state of calmness. In the 
peace of meditation all waves of sensations and thoughts are 
absent from the mind. In the deeper state of calmness,  one 
perceives in that stillness the mooned reflection of God's 
presence. Peace is a negative state, being merely the absence 
of the waves of pleasure, pain, and indifference,- and so after 
a little while the meditator is attracted once more by the de-
sire to experience the waves of motion. But as  meditative 
peace deepens into calmness and the ultimate positive state 
of bliss, the meditator experiences a joy that is ever new and 
all-satisfying. 
When you sleep, you still thoughts and sensations pas-
sively. When by meditation you still thoughts and sensations 
consciously, you experience first the state of peace; and the 
muscles of your face will form a smile that reflects the peace 
of your heart. But you must look beyond peace in order to be-
hold, undistorted by sensory stimuli and motor reflexes from 
sense-associated thoughts, the purity of your soul. The state 
you feel then is ever-new bliss. Saints always have this joy in 
their hearts. Secure in the divine inner assurance, they are un-
shaken by anger or fear. Using the scalpel of reason or intu-
ition, they can dissect their own or others' thoughts on the op-
erating table of the mind and remain unmoved. "In soul bliss 
all grief is annihilated. Indeed, the discrimination of the bliss-
ful man soon becomes firmly established (in the Self)."* 
Smile with the Love of God 
Most smiles are born of good emotions arising out of doing 
good, or out of feeling sympathy, love, kindness, or mercy. But 
the most wonderful way to smile is to fill your heart with the 
love of God. Then you will be able to love everybody; you will 
be able to smile all the time. All other forms of smiles are 
evanescent because emotions flicker and pass away, no matter 
how good they are. The only thing that can last is the joy of God. 
When you have that, you can smile all the time. Otherwise, 
* Bhagavad Gita 11:65. 

174  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
when you are feeling merciful toward someone and he returns 
your kindness with a slap, you won't be able to feel mercy to-
ward him any longer. 
A man I knew made a great show of his distress when his 
wife died. I saw through his emotionalism.  "You will marry 
within a month," I told him. He was so angry at me he would 
not see me after that, but he did remarry within a month. He 
thought his love for the first wife was so great, but you see how 
quickly he forgot her. 
I shall never forget how much my guru, Sri Yukteswarji, 
taught me when he told me this little story about his  life: 
"When I was a little boy I took a notion that I wanted an ugly 
little dog belonging to a neighbour. I kept my household in tur-
moil for weeks to get that dog. My ears were deaf to offers of 
pets with more prepossessing appearance. I wanted only that 
dog." 
The same sort of fixation seizes people in so-called ro-
mance. Lovers become hypnotized by a face,- they can't forget 
it. But the real beauty we should seek in others is not outward, 
but inward. 
When your soul is filled with joy you are attractive. I like 
only divine smiles, because without them, human beings are 
like puppets—today they are saying they will love you forever,-
tomorrow they are in the grave. Where is their great love then? 
Where is the promise, "I'll love you forever"? But if you can 
make God say even once to you, "I love you," it is for eternity. 
Why do you waste your time for a little human love, and money, 
and this and that, when in God you can find everything—all the 
love that is in the whole world, all the power in creation? But 
don't seek Him for power; seek Him for love. Then you will dis-
cover the chink in His armour. When you give Him your un-
conditional love, He can no longer refuse you Himself. 
To Find Bliss, Meditate 
Meditate more. You do not know how wonderful it is. It is 
much greater to meditate than to spend hours seeking money 
or human love or anything else that you can think of.  The 
more you meditate, and the more your mind stays centred in 
the spiritual state during activity, the more you will be able to 

BE A SMILE  MILLIONAIRE  175 
smile. I am always there now, in that bliss-consciousness of 
God. Nothing affects me; whether I am alone or with people, 
that joy of the Lord is always there. I have retained my smile— 
but to win it permanently was hard work! The same smiles are 
there within you,- the same joy and bliss of the soul is there. 
You don't have to acquire them, but rather regain them. You 
have merely lost them temporarily by identifying yourself with 
the senses. 
If you think that objects of sight, hearing, taste, smell, and 
touch will give you supreme joy, you are mightily mistaken. 
They will only take it away. If you put conditions around your 
joy—"without the sight of that face I cannot be happy"—you 
will never find unalloyed bliss. Because no  sense-produced 
pleasure is permanent. Time relentlessly works its havoc on 
physical beauty; everything in the material world is subject to 
change. Therefore if you could see all the beautiful faces in the 
world; if you were to hear all the music and touch everything 
that you desire to, you would still not have found real happi-
ness. You may imagine you are happy, however. Sometimes, af-
ter you have dug and dug to get at some object of desire, you 
find no happiness in the object itself, yet you derive a certain 
satisfaction from the labour you have put into getting it, and 
you therefore think you are happy. But such satisfactions are 
short-lived. 
So so not  seek your happiness in the  senses.  Find joy 
within and express it in your face. When you do that, wherever 
you go a little smile will surcharge everyone with your divine 
magnetism. Everybody will be happy! 
But remember it is the Lord alone who changes each heart; 
we must not at all ascribe to ourselves the power to do good. 
The only one who does good is God. It is His world. If you feel 
Him as the Indweller of this body—that it is he who works in 
everything; and if you give everything—both good and bad ac-
tions—to Him, you will be surprised to see how all your ac-
tions gradually will be changed to good. You will not be able to 
do anything wrong when the consciousness of God is with you. 
Give your life to Him. In all you do, say, "It's You, Lord, not I! 
Not I, Lord!" Destroy ego; it is a great obstruction to this lib-
erating realization. You are not the Doer; can you lift your hand 

176  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
if the Lord quenches the little beam of life in your medulla ob-
longata? * 
How to Banish External Impressions 
Once I was sitting outdoors at Encinitas, and it was very 
cold. I turned my consciousness within, and in a twinkling I 
couldn't feel the cold at all. Joy came over me once in a while 
;
I saw my surroundings melt into one light, like the beam of a 
motion picture. If I concentrated on the picture, I saw the pic-
ture. If I concentrated on the beam, the world vanished. You 
cannot see anything without your consciousness.  So if you 
have full mastery over your mind, and you look within at your 
soul, even though your eyes are open you will see only that 
great light of God, and feel His great joy. Only as you look out-
ward through the eyes will your consciousness perceive the 
outer world. It is all God's motion picture. I could see, that day 
in Encinitas, on one side the sensations and thoughts that were 
dreams of my consciousness which came from God, and on the 
other side, as I retired within, no sensations at all—just pure 
joy. And though I was sitting in that extreme cold, clad only in 
swim trunks, I could feel the cold and the scenery disappear 
and joy alone come; later I felt the slight impressions of sensa-
tions together with that great joy. 
Practise this—practise the presence of God. Don't be sat-
isfied with a little prayer, or seeing a little light, and then go-
ing to bed. Sleep is a drug. If you can fairly control sex if you 
;
can fairly control all the senses; and if you go after God with 
all the power of your soul, He will come to you. Even if you are 
a great moralist and a spiritually inclined person, without the 
perception of God you have very little. 
So do not deceive yourself. Meditate  more—unceasingly 
and sincerely. Tell God, "I know my weaknesses. But Lord, 
they belong to You, because You created me. I have no wish for 
anything except to be with You, because You are the One who 
is showing this movie. You are free from its dual aspects of 
comedy and tragedy. So am I free, because I am Your child." 
Don't call yourself a sinner; nor call yourself righteous and 
* The medulla centre (or chakra) is the principal point at which life force en-
ters into the body. 

BE A SMILE  MILLIONAIRE  177 
be proud. Say rather that the Lord is with you, and that  He— 
no one else!—is working through you. Then you will see a dif-
ferent world. Without the consciousness of God this world ap-
pears full of struggle, violence, and terrible  disappointments. 
But with Him it is a haven of happiness. 
When  I  was  watching  the  motion  picture,  Song  of 
Bernadette,  I was so deeply touched by some of the events in 
the saint's life that I cried. At last I said: "What's the matter 
with me?" I looked at the picture again and saw only shadows 
and light; I lost the consciousness of drama. I couldn't cry any-
more; a great joyous state came over me. 
The Motion Picture of Creation 
In a second, God can duplicate the form of any person who 
has gone out of the world; He wants you to know that. He 
wants you to understand that this creation is a show. If you 
take the show seriously, you are going to get hurt, and you 
won't like it; you won't be able to stand life, with its sorrow 
and disease and pain. Whenever anything hurts the body, I put 
my mind at the seat of spiritual awareness at the point between 
the eyebrows; then I feel no pain at all. But when I concentrate 
on the hurt, I feel the delusion of pain. If you can keep your 
mind centred in the spiritual consciousness of your soul you 
will not suffer when the delusive shadows of sorrow appear on 
your mental screen. Pray to God unceasingly to reveal Himself 
as the sole joyous Reality. 
You have already lost so much time—death may take you 
away at any moment, and then you won't have time to know 
Him. You must realize Him before you go out of the body cage. 
Tell Him, "I want to feel Your presence." But He won't let you 
out of this hospital of delusion permanently until you cure 
yourself of the disease of desires. Do everything for God. Work-
ing for Him is just as important to your spiritual progress as 
meditation. 
Meditate on the Lord at night until you are uplifted in Him 
and feel locked in His joy; and when you come down to per-
form activities during the day, bring and keep with you the re-
membrance of that state. Then you will be all the time with 
God. And you will always be able to smile and say, "A little bit 

178  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
of sorrow or a little bit of pleasure or a little bit of peace can-
not create any tumult in the ocean of ever-new bliss that fills 
my soul." 
Laugh at maya,  delusion. Watch life as a cosmic  motion 
picture, then it cannot work its delusive magic on you any-
more. Be in God-bliss. When you can stand unshaken  'midst 
the crash of breaking worlds, you shall know that God is real. 
He doesn't mean to hurt you. He has made you in His image. 
He has made you already what He is. That is what you don't 
realize, because you acknowledge only that you are a human 
being; you do not know that thought is a delusion. 
When you are suffering from cancer it is not fun. Yet St. 
Francis suffered from diseases and at the same time he was 
healing the sick and raising the dead. His divine joy could not 
be taken away. So by all means get to God. But He won't re-
ceive you until you prove to Him that you do want Him and 
that you have no desire to get mixed up in His show. 
Don't Question God—Love Him 
Nor should you question God. You will reap only doubt. 
You will not be able to understand His laws until you become 
one with Him. So why waste time trying to understand them 
by an intellectual approach? If you are reading a novel in which 
the hero is being mistreated, the villain is winning, and each 
chapter seems to contradict the preceding one, you will feel 
frustrated and angry with the author. But when you read the 
last chapter you are satisfied, and you think how wonderful 
that novel was because it was so complex. So God is the Mas-
ter-Novelist, and one is wonderstruck at the paradoxes and in-
tricate plot of His creation. Don't try to solve these riddles; you 
will be lost. When you find Him, in that last chapter, He will 
give you the solutions to all the enigmas of human life. And 
you won't be able to question His wisdom when you hear His 
replies. That I know! 
Live  with  God  in  your  heart  and have  no  fear  in  the 
world—fear will be afraid of you! You will be free from this 
cosmic delusion. Then you will smile, "I know at last the mys-
tery of it all." But don't try to know first; love God first. Then 
He will tell you everything. And you can smile an  eternal 

BE A SMILE  MILLIONAIRE  179 
smile. Your thoughts, your words, your writings, and every-
thing you do will be impregnated with the joy shining in that 
smile. Wherever you meditate you will leave behind a fra-
grance of smiles, and whoever will come there will also be 
moved to smile with God. You can smile all the time when 
you dwell in His ineffable bliss. 

