Understanding the Unreality 
of Matter 
Circa  1926 
The Hindu scriptures point out that belief in the nonexis-
tence of matter and the allness of Spirit should not be founded 
on dogmatic, illogical, unintelligible, or inexplicable theories, 
but on scientific inner investigation and exact understanding. 
People generally identify themselves with the body, which 
is supported by food; but they fail to realize that the  basic 
source of bodily existence is prana  (life energy).*  No food or 
other outer aid can revive a man from whom the cosmic cur-
rent has withdrawn. 
The link between man's material body and his immaterial 
mind is prana.  The ancient Hindu sages discovered the exis-
tence of prana and formulated the science of pranayama,i  life-
energy control. 
Lord Jesus fasted in the wilderness for forty days. He said: 
"Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that pro-
ceedeth out of the mouth of God."* 
The "word" is cosmic vibration,- the "mouth of God"  is 
the medulla oblongata in the posterior part of the brain, taper-
ing off into the spinal cord. This, the most vital spot in the hu-
man body, is the divine entrance ("mouth of God") for the 
* "Lifetrons," the finer-than-atomic energies that sustain life in all things in 
the universe. There are two kinds of prana:  cosmic energy, the omnipresent 
source of life and vitality permeating and surrounding all living things; and the 
specific prana or energy pervading each human body. 
t Through pranayama  the adept is able to control the life energy in the sen-
sory and motor nerves, and thus free his mind from body-consciousness dur-
ing meditation. He is able also to use this life energy to heal or vitalize his body 
at will. 
* Matthew  4:4. 
55 

56  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
"word" or Aum, * the cosmic vibratory energy by which man 
is sustained. 
People who never fast do not know from experience that 
man can live, as Christ did for forty days, solely by the "word" 
of God. 
In the early stages of a week's fasting, hunger is present; 
but as the days go by, less hunger and a sense of freedom are 
distinctly felt. Why? Because denial of gross food to the body 
compels it to depend on immaterial food: the life current. 
Man's will power is the great generator of energy. Through 
will power and willingness one is able to draw quickly on the 
infinite store of inner strength. A person who is unwilling to 
perform his daily tasks experiences a lack of energy. A man 
who works hard but with willingness is borne up physically 
and mentally by the cosmic current. 
One who learns and practises the metaphysical methods of 
living by will power and by consciously  tapping the  inex-
haustible source of life energy is freed from many limitations 
of the body. 
The Hindu sages and yogis say that matter is materialized 
mind-stuff;  and some of them, like Jesus, have proved this 
truth by demonstrating the power to materialize and demate-
rialize their bodies and other physical objects. 
The Chemical Elements of Matter Are Electronic Vibrations 
Modern science shows that matter is composed of vibra-
tory forces. The chemical elements, the structural factors re-
sponsible for all forms in the universe—from stones and stars 
to man—are nothing more than different forms of electronic 
vibrations. For example, in ice we find coldness, weight, form; 
it is visible. Melt the ice; it becomes water. Pass electricity 
throught it; it becomes invisible hydrogen and oxygen, which 
analysed further, are forms of electronic vibrations. One may 
therefore say scientifically that ice does not exist, even though 
* Gross matter emanates from and is sustained by the intelligent  cosmic 
vibration of God, the subtle building material of the universe. The primal prop-
erties of this vibration are light and sound. Aum is the sound of God's creative 
vibration, referred to in Christian scriptures as the Amen, the Holy Ghost, and 
the Word. (See Aum in glossary.) 

UNDERSTANDING  THE UNREALITY  OF MATTER  57 
it is perceptible to our senses of sight, touch, and so on. In 
reality its essence is invisible electrons or forms of energy. 
In other words, that which can be dissolved into invisi-
bility cannot be said to have valid existence. In this  sense, 
matter can be considered as not existing; but matter does have 
relative existence. Matter exists in relation to our mind and as 
an expression of invisible electronic forces that do exist, being 
unchangeable and immortal. 
Both water and ice are manifestations of invisible gases 
and have only formal,  transitory existence.  Similarly,  both 
mortal mind and matter are fleeting manifestations of Divine 
Consciousness, and possess merely formal existence; in reality 
only Cosmic Mind exists. 
Just as a child is born through the instrumentality of par-
ents, so matter is dependent on mind for its existence. Matter 
is born from Divine Mind and is perceptible to mortal mind; in 
itself and of itself, matter has no reality, no intrinsic existence. 
The blind or nonintellectual electronic forces of creation 
are nevertheless creative teleological agents because they con-
tain within themselves the vibrations of the universal,  con-
scious-of-itself life force or prana,  which in turn issued from 
the fiat of Divinity. 
"God said, Let there be light: and there was light,"*  that 
is, the projection of Divine Thought and Will became light or 
vibratory energy, the flowing forth of life current and electrons, 
which further vibrated more strongly and became the diverse 
subtle or unseen forces of nature, which in turn  externalized 
themselves as the ninety-two principal elements of matter that 
constitute the universe. 
To human consciousness, matter is both perceptible and 
real. But man has discovered through theoretical investigation, 
through  logic,  and through  certain  laboratory  experiments 
(such as converting a visible piece of ice into invisible forces) 
that a permanent and unalterable creative power must under-
lie all the transitory and illusive forms of the  phenomenal 
world. 
This truth may be grasped just as we grasp the fact that the 
* Genesis  1:3 (Bible). 

58  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
ocean exists though its waves have no permanent  existence, 
being just passing, formal manifestations  of one great  sub-
stance. Waves cannot exist without the ocean, but the ocean 
exists with or without waves. 
These concepts can be intellectually understood but can-
not be known  until one has learned the method of converting 
matter into life force, and life force into Cosmic  Conscious-
ness, * as Christ, Krishna, and other Self-realized masters were 
able to do. To such enlightened ones, matter per se does not 
exist, because they see that beneath the slight rippling waves 
of creation is the changless Ocean of Spirit. 
The Universe Is God's Dream 
In the Vedantai  and Yoga philosophies the universe is spo-
ken of as God's dream. Matter and mind—the cosmos with its 
stars and planets; the gross surface waves and the subtle under-
currents of the material creation; the human powers of feeling, 
will, and consciousness;  and the states of life and death, day 
and night, health and disease, success and failure—are realities 
according  to the law of relativity  governing  this  dream  of 
God's. 
All the dualities perceived by the law of relativity are real 
to the dreamer, the mortal man who plays his little part in the 
great cosmic dream. To escape from maya,  illusion, the law of 
relativity, one must awaken from the dream into eternal God-
wakefulness. We cannot change the lawful dream by imagina-
tion or by denying its existence, or by accepting "life" but re-
jecting "death," or by recognizing health but ignoring sickness. 
One state is as much a part of its opposite state as are the two 
sides of a fabric. The dualities are inherently and essentially 
one. The truth  seeker does not try to separate them in  his 
mind, but to rise above them by wisdom. 
The man who considers his body to be different from his 
mind, and who wants to accept as "real" only the positive, 
* The essence of Spirit. (See glossary.) 
t Literally, "end of the Vedas." Vedanta  is the philosophy presented in the lat-
ter portion of Vedas. This philosophy declares that God is the only reality and 
that creation is essentially an illusion. Man's duty therefore is to transcend the 
illusion by realization of God. 

UNDERSTANDING  THE UNREALITY  OF MATTER  59 
happy, and beneficial aspects of a universe unalterably dual in 
its nature, is a man deeply asleep in the delusions of the dream 
world. 
Just as a person has dreams that seem real for a time but 
lose their validity when he emerges into the waking state of 
consciousness, so it is possible for man to awaken from the 
dream of matter-reality and to live in the changeless realm of 
Spirit. 
Only the superman, who has learned to expand and trans-
fer his consciousness to the Infinite, can realize creation as a 
dream of God's; he alone can say with true knowledge that 
matter has no existence. By means of a long series of self-dis-
ciplinary steps—through following the scientific yoga path or 
any other way of spiritual perfection, whether that of love, wis-
dom, service, or self-effacement—the God-seeker dissolves the 
dualities and discerns the Eternal Oneness. "Whosoever, freed 
from delusion, knows Me thus as the Supreme Spirit, knows 
all. He worships Me with his whole being."* 
* Bhagavad Gita XV: 19. 

Man's Greatest  Adventure 
Self-Realization Fellowship International Headquarters, 
Los Angeles, California, February 29, 1940 
Life is the greatest adventure imaginable. Although some 
lives are without much interest and excitement, others are full 
of extraordinary experiences. I heard of a man who tried thirty-
two times to commit suicide, and something happened every 
time to prevent him. Imagine what it would be like to know 
all about the lives of all the people who are now on earth, and 
those who are gone, and those who are yet to come! Such is 
God's power. Jesus said, "Are not two sparrows sold for a far-
thing? and one of them shall not fall on the ground without 
[the knowledge of] your Father."* The lifetimes of experiences 
of all men are in God's memory. It is difficult indeed to con-
ceive of a consciousness that is aware of everything that has 
ever happened. Yet to fathom the nature of Spirit is the great-
est adventure in this universe. I will give you a picture of it as 
it is coming at this moment before my spiritual eye.t 
Truths are more than imagination; they are real. Yet their 
origin is a thought in the mind of God. All of the  different 
forms  of atomic  matter,  for example,  are but  materialized 
thoughts of God—they can be reconverted into thoughts, and 
the thoughts can again be materialized into objects. Man also 
has the power to conceive ideas, but his imagination is not 
very strong. If his imagination became powerful enough, man 
could create material objects on earth, t  He has latent  within 
* Matthew  10:29. 
t The telescopic gaze of intuition. During deep meditation the single or spiri-
tual eye becomes visible within the central part of the forehead. Great yogis 
who live unbrokenly in the state of God-consciousness are able to behold it 
whether meditating or carrying on ordinary activities. 
$ Jesus spoke of the divine potential in that man who realizes the presence of 
God within himself: "Belive me that I am in the Father, and the Father in 
60 

MAN'S GREATEST  ADVENTURE  61 
him  the  same  creative  power  by which  God,  even  as  He 
thought, materialized His mental creations in the world. But it 
has become next  to impossible for man to materialize  his 
thoughts because he has not utilized the free power, the divine 
power of thought, bestowed on him by God. 
When we try to imagine the consciousness  of God we 
wonder how He can remember all things, because we judge 
everything by the standard of our own mental capacity. We un-
derstand according to our own experience. A person whose 
memory is not strong tends to assume that everyone else's 
memory is the same way. Yet there are persons of exceptional 
memory who can recall a whole book, perhaps, just as easily as 
you can remember a few lines. Those who are forgetful find it 
difficult to realize that others can have an unfailing power of 
recollection. 
A jeweller remembers his jewels, a bookkeeper the figures 
in his books,- so God is able to remember everything that He 
has created in this universe. Being gifted with almighty power, 
He has instant recall of everything that has ever happened. God 
does not need a limited physical brain to remember what has 
passed. His limitless consciousness is all-knowing. 
The Origin and Power of Memory 
Memory is a wondrous power. All human memory comes 
from God's tremendous memory. For example, you cannot tell 
me about all the motion pictures you have seen since birth, 
but if I were to show you one of those films again, you would 
instantly recall it. The divine underlying memory is right 
there  within  you,  ever recognizing  experiences  that  have 
passed. As soon as you see the opening scene again, the whole 
story comes back to you. "Oh, I saw this picture before," you 
say. "I remember how it ended." 
How is it that we can recognize a picture—every detail of 
it—that we have seen years ago? Because all happenings are 
recorded in the brain. As soon as you put the needle of atten-
tion on a certain record of experience, your memory begins to 
play back that experience. If I ask where you were sitting when 
me— I say unto you, He that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do 
also,- and greater works than these shall he do..." (John  14:11-12). 

62  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
we were here together last Thursday, you recall it and begin to 
remember other things as well. If I ask, "What did I say?" my 
words start coming back to you. 
The inner power of memory comes from God and is per-
fect. It never forgets. The ordinary man's memory cannot hold 
the consciousness of all experiences at one time, but the un-
derlying divine memory retains everything simultaneously and 
permanently. Therefore good or poor memory is a matter of 
conviction. You have convinced yourself that you have a weak 
memory and so you have a weak memory. However, it is not 
easy to jump from this belief to the opposite. Much effort is re-
quired to convince yourself that yotir memory is in actuality a 
manifestation of the all-recalling divine memory of God. 
The greatest human memory is naught but a borrowing 
from  the  unlimited  consciousness  of  God,  in  which  are 
recorded all the adventures of all human beings and other life-
forms. 
Creation—Dual Adventure of God and Man 
The story of God's creation is marvellous—how He pro-
jected into existence all beings on this earth, and how He is 
working behind the scenes to bring us back to our real exis-
tence in Him. It is almost impossible to describe in human lan-
guage the cosmic adventure of God's creation and its subtle in-
tertwining with the individual life-adventures of countless 
human beings. 
We find that human beings live on the average sixty years, 
the crocodile from sixty to a hundred. The redwood tree lives 
for two thousand years, the dog only about fourteen, and the 
horse at most about thirty-six years. It is evident that Someone 
has fixed these various life-spans. Yet we hear of some great yo-
gis who have lived for hundreds of years. * I know definitely 
that Mahavatar Babajit has lived for centuries and is still in his 
* "Great saints who have awakened from the cosmic mayic dream and have 
realized this world as an idea in the Divine Mind, can do as they wish with the 
body, knowing it to be only a manipulatable form of condensed or frozen en-
ergy. Though physical scientists now understand that matter is nothing but 
congealed energy, illumined masters have passed victoriously from theory to 
practice in the field of matter control" (Autobiography of a Yogi, chapter 31). 
t Mahavatar,  "great or divine incarnation"; Babaji, "revered father." He is the 

MAN'S GREATEST  ADVENTURE  63 
body in perfect youth. Trailanga Swami* is said to have lived 
for more than three hundred years. Truth is more fascinating 
than fiction. 
It is possible to imagine that under favourable conditions 
(and if there is no waste of vital essence,t and there is proper 
food and right thinking) the human body could go on indefi-
nitely. But the pressures on the body are terrific. When a mouse 
is caught in a trap, its heart beats many times faster than it 
does normally, and when you are unable to pay your bills, your 
heart does the same! Thus worry takes its toll. And there are 
other kinds of stress. I am told that the Police Commissioner 
of Chicago has demonstrated with instruments the possibility 
that if noise were taken away from the cities, their residents 
would live ten years longer. 
We are living in a wonderful world nevertheless.  Those 
who exist only to "eat, drink, and be merry/' and to sleep, have 
no idea of the wonders fo human life. 
The  adventure begins  with  the  struggle  the  soul  goes 
through to enter a womb at the time of conception. In the as-
tral world* there are millions of souls struggling to return to 
earth, to enter the mated sperm and ovum cells at the time of 
conception.  Saint or sinner, unless you have attained  final 
guru of Lahiri Mahasaya, who in turn is the guru of Swami Sri Yukteswar, the 
guru of Paramahansa Yogananda. Babaji's transcendental life and powers are de-
scribed in Autobiography  of a Yogi. 
* In addition to his extraordinary age, Trailanga Swami was noted for his many 
miracles. He weighed three hundred pounds, although he rarely ate. Often he 
would meditate for days, seated on top of the Ganges waters; or remain some-
times hidden for long periods under its waves. He was often seen at  the 
Manikarnika Ghat, sitting motionless in the sun on the blistering stone slabs. 
His habitual disregard of nature's laws was a constant reminder to those who 
saw him that oneness with God is the highest law. 
t The vital essence, or sexual fluid, contains a high concentration of prana.  If 
not dissipated, the power therein can be used to enhance physical health, men-
tal vitality and creativity, and spiritual development. 
* "In my Father's house are many mansions..." (John 14:2 Bible). The high and 
low astral spheres, composed of subtle light and energies of lifetrons, are the 
heaven (or hell) to which souls go after death of the physical body. The length 
of stay there is karmically predetermined. So long as one has unfulfilled ma-
terial desires or earthly karma  (effects of past actions not yet worked out), he 
must reincarnate on earth to continue his evolution back to God. 

64  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
redemption there is a great desire to reincarnate again on earth. 
At the time of conception there is a flash in the ether and one 
soul enters as the sperm and ovum cells unite. You had to fight 
to get into the womb. Not only you but many souls rushed to 
enter, and the ones that won are you, and you, and I. It was not 
an easy victory. 
Prenatal Consciousness 
After you have entered the womb you ask, "What have I 
done? I have been free from the confining mortal body for so 
long, gliding along in a weightless body of light, and now I am 
caught again in a physical form." Nevertheless, you become 
accustomed to these new conditions during the nine months in 
the womb. That is the punishment. It is nine months of living 
in a dungeon in which you have to breathe through someone 
else, eat through someone else, receive your blood, and the 
power for its circulation, through someone else. You are de-
pendent. Your soul cries to the Lord, "Let me out of this prison! 
I can't see, I can't hear, I am bound." 
If there is a hades or purgatory it is those nine months in 
the mother's body—helpless, in darkness, bound to one spot 
like a tree, with only occasional memories of the past coming 
in, and then lapses into sleep. It is when memories of the past 
life come that you struggle in the mother's body. I have trans-
ported my consciousness into these prenatal states and I know 
what I am saying.* The baby's sleep and wakefulness in the 
mother's body do not depend on her sleeping and waking. The 
child's will to move is a memory coming from the soul's past. 
So he stirs restlessly in the mother's body until he tires and 
goes to sleep. Then he wakes up fo a while and moves again. 
He feels hunger, and, through the nourishment in the mother's 
blood, the satisfaction of his hunger. 
The infant slightly hears the vibrations of the mother's 
heartbeat and circulation; by these sounds he is made con-
scious of his body and he wants to be free. Thus the soul's first 
adventure is the fight between two ideas: the wish to return to 
earth in a human form, and the desire to feel the freedom of 
having no form. 
* It is possible for the advanced yogi, through his interior union with om-
nipresent God, to perceive sympathetically the experiences of all beings. 

MAN'S GREATEST  ADVENTURE  65 
The soul's human encasement starts out as a fishlike form 
with a tiny tail. That form grows into an animal form, curled 
up in the womb. There comes an occasional memory of the 
past life, and the embryo stirs. The struggle becomes greater as 
the embryo begins to grow into a human form in the mother's 
body. The soul cries, "Let me out!" When the will becomes 
very strong, the baby is born. Premature babies are souls who 
are very stubborn-willed.  They don't want to remain  nine 
months in the mother's body, and so they come early. 
The Breath of Life 
The infant arrives in this world crying; because, the saints 
say, the soul remembers its previous incarnations and does not 
like the thought of coming back to earth again to go through 
the struggle of life here. Related also to this memory is the at-
titude of supplication in which a baby usually holds its hands 
before it comes into the world. It is praying to God,  "Please 
don't give me physical birth again." 
The physiological explanation of the baby's crying is that 
the lungs must be opened up in order to start the breathing 
process, and the baby's first cry is an effort to activate the lungs 
and start the breath of life. When the baby is born, the breath 
goes in, and the soul that was semi-dormant becomes a living 
being with an independent life. "God breathed into his nostrils 
the breath of life; and man became a living soul."* Many per-
sons mistakenly believe that the soul enters the body at birth, 
but if the soul were not already there, the body would not have 
developed from the original tiny cells. Should the soul leave 
the embryo before birth, the infant will be born dead. 
Man's body is made of sixteen basic material  elements 
supported and activated by nineteen elementst  of subtle en-
ergy. These can be condensed into pure consciousness.  "Man 
became a living soul" refers to the fact that the ordinary man's 
physical body, which is made of chemicals ("the dust of the 
* Genesis  2:7 (Bible). 
t The essence of the astral body that dwells within man's physical form, 
activating and enlivening it. These nineteen elements are: intelligence, ego, 
feeling, mind (sense consciousness); the powers behind the five senses and 
five instruments of action; and the five pranas,  or life forces. 

66  MAN'S ETERNAL QUEST 
ground"), must breathe oxygen in order to be sustained on 
earth, as ordained by God when He first "breathed into his nos-
trils the breath of life." 
When the baby is born, he blinks at the light, he hears 
sounds, he smells and tastes, and he breathes. He sees that con-
ditions seem to be normal—he has a physical body again. His 
prenatal resistance to birth ends with his first breath,  when 
maya  (the cosmic delusion that "existence" depends on body 
and breath) comes over him. He feels once more attracted to 
the physical world. 
As time goes on the baby struggles for control over his 
body. How often you see him repeatedly thrusting his hands 
and feet up in the air in an attempt at coordination! All these 
actions are directed by the subconscious mind through  the 
soul's memory of the past. That memory is always there. You 
instinctively fear death because you remember the many times 
you have been through that experience. You are also afraid of 
pain because you have suffered many times before. 
When the baby grows into a little child he is surrounded 
by the influences of the mother's and father's guiding will, and 
the wills of other relatives as well. Each one wants him to be 
something different, and his naughty friends want him to be 
still something else! 
The child has a great many struggles with these conflict-
ing pressures. This is a miserable life, so it is good to give your 
children a little freedom. Young ones who are given too much 
freedom, however, may later lament, "I wish I had been told 
long ago not to do this,- then I would not be what I am today." 
Think of all the struggles, physiological and mental, one has to 
go through until he becomes a youth. At that time of life the 
senses become more active and the youth has a great inner bat-
tle with himself. The struggle with the senses is a tremendous 
contest. To conquer in this adventure of youth, to go victori-
ously through this thrill of living, is a great experience. 
Man Should Befriend Himself 
It is wonderful to be alive, but there are many agents wait-
ing to kill us. An adventure with wild animals in South Africa 
is nothing compared to the adventure of life itself. No other 

MAN'S GREATEST  ADVENTURE  67 
tale in history is as interesting. Man with his  intelligence 
knows how to protect himself against animals, but he doesn't 
know how to protect himself against his own bad habits and 
evil ways. The greatest of all enemies of man is himself. More 
than personal or national enemies, more than germs, bombs, 
or any other threat, man should fear himself when he is wrong. 
To remain in ignorance of your divine nature and to be over-
powered by had habits is to make an enemy of your own self. 
The best way to be successful in this adventure of life is to be 
your own friend. Krishna said: "The Self is the friend of the 
(transformed) self, but the Enemy of the unregenerate self."* 
The Subtle Enemies 
It is easy to picture ourselves starting off to explore some 
wild and unknown country. If we are going by ship we want a 
lifeboat with us should the steamer sink, we know we can get 
;
into the boat and save ourselves. But in so many of life's expe-
riences there seems to be a leak in our lifeboat, no matter what 
precautions we have taken. 
In a jungle infested with animals you can take reasonable 
care against them, but subtle dangers are more difficult  to 
overcome. How to protect oneself against a barrage of germs? 
Millions are floating around us all the time. We think we are 
safe when we take precautions against dangers we can see and 
hear, but we have only inadequate means to protect ourselves 
against germs. In your own bloodstream the white corpuscles 
are constantly fighting these organisms. Drugs only numb 
them,- the white corpuscles are the soldiers who move in and 
destroy them. If your blood is weak, the soldiers will not be 
able to help you. In the lungs of many unsuspecting persons 
lurk fierce tuberculosis bacilli, ready to destroy their host. 
Nature forms a restraining wall of cells around them, but it is 
effective only so long as the body can keep up its resistance. 
This struggle of life goes on constantly in the unseen jungle 
of life within! If you could examine your food under a micro-
scope you would not eat it. Germs are having a feast thereon, 
and you are swallowing them whole. The water you drink is 
alive with such organisms. There is no true vegetarian be-
* Bhagavad Gita VI:6. 

68  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
cause everyone eats millions of germs each day. Shall man 
then stop eating? 
Prepare for Every Kind of Battle 
In order to go safely through this jungle of life you must 
equip yourself with the proper weapons. You have to be a well-
trained soldier. The layman who doesn't know how to protect 
himself is soon killed. The wise man who is armed against all 
forms of warfare—against disease, against destiny and karma, 
against all evil thoughts and habits—becomes  the victor in 
this adventure. It requires carefulness and, in addition,  the 
adoption of certain methods by which we can overcome our 
enemies. 
As we progress we learn better methods of vanquishing 
the causes of our physical, mental, moral, and spiritual dis-
asters. When you have gone successfully through physical ill-
nesses and accidents and inner struggles, then you can say 
that life was a sweet adventure. Jesus could say this. But be-
fore you have similarly conquered, it is premature to say that 
life is sweet. Until you have attained final ascension, libera-
tion of the soul in God, life is not yet finished for you. You 
have not overcome the desire to be adventurous until you 
have ascended consciously in Spirit. 
Seeing someone who is suffering, you feel thankful that 
you are not going through that particular adventure. But you 
may be next. The possibilities of harm to the body are numer-
ous. So be equipped. The scientist says, "Eat nourishing food 
and follow health laws to protect yourself from germs." The 
politician says, "Be good soldiers to protect yourselves from 
outside enemies." We are living in strange times. Even women, 
the proverbial saviours of the world, are being trained as sol-
diers to kill others' children. Horrible! But once in a while 
some good comes from war—it removes cowardice from us. 
The Importance of Mind Power 
In this jungle of life, surrounded by  enemies—disease, 
poverty, suffering, bad habits, and wrong desires—there are so 
many rules to be observed that life becomes intolerable when 
you try to keep them all in mind. You tire of them because 

MAN'S GREATEST  ADVENTURE  69 
each department of life is limitless in its potential for diversity. 
When you attempt to apply health rules you are nearly over-
whelmed—there is no time to think about anything else! And 
everyone has a different set of health precepts for you to fol-
low. We are under a great hypnosis. As I tried different meth-
ods, this truth dawned on me: mind controls the  effectiveness 
of them all. 
God has given us one tremendous instrument of protec-
tion—more powerful than machine guns, electricity, poison 
gas, or any medicine—the mind. It is the mind that must be 
strengthened. As for the body, I will do only the will of God. If 
He tells me to go to a doctor, it is all right, and if He tells me 
to suffer, it is all right. Whatever is His will is my will. An im-
portant part of the adventure of life is to get hold of the mind, 
and to keep that controlled mind constantly attuned to  the 
Lord. This is the secret of a happy, successful existence. 
The Ultimate Protection Is God-Communion 
Even though you adopt physical methods of healing, do 
not put all your faith in the methods, but in the power of God 
behind them. If you have cut your finger, put iodine on it, but 
inwardly pary: "Lord, help me not to be dependent on medi-
cine, but to rely on mind power alone." You have not been 
taught how to attain that mental state. It comes by exercising 
mind power and by attuning the mind to God through medita-
tion. In this way you should gain complete power over the 
mind before you try to deny matter and material remedies. Un-
til then it is best to take commonsense steps to help the body. 
When you can drink poison and remain unaffected by it, you 
can rightfully deny matter and say mind is everything.  You 
must arrive at that consciousness first. 
God offers you an invincible weapon by which you can 
eradicate all your sorrows and suffering: wisdom, which comes 
through God-communion. The easiest way to overcome dis-
ease,  disappointments,  and  disasters  is  to  be  in  constant 
attunement with God. 
We are babes in the woods of life, forced to learn by our 
own experiences and troubles, stumbling into pitfalls of sick-
ness and wrong habits. Again and again we have to raise our 

70  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
voices for help. But the Supreme Help comes from tuning in 
with Spirit. 
Whenever you are in trouble, pray: "Lord, You are within 
me and all around me. I am in the castle of Thy presence. I 
have been struggling through life, surrounded by many kinds 
of deadly enemies. I now see that they are not really agents for 
my destruction; You have put me on earth to test my power. I 
am going through these tests only to prove myself. I am game 
to fight the evils that surround me; I will vanquish them by the 
almightiness of Your presence. And when I shall have passed 
through the adventure of this life I will say: 'Lord, it was hard 
to be brave and fight; but the greater my terror, the greater was 
the strength within me, given by You, by which I conquered 
and realized that I am made in Your image. You are the King of 
this universe and I am Your child, a prince of the universe. 
What have I to fear?'" 
As soon as you realize you have been born a human being 
you have everything to fear. There seems to be no escape. No 
matter what precautions you take, there is always a misstep 
somewhere. Your only security is in God. Whether you are in 
the African jungle or at war or racked by disease and poverty, 
just say to the Lord, and believe: "I am in the armoured car of 
Your presence,  moving  across  the battlefield  of life.  I  am 
protected." 
There is no other way to be safe. Use common sense and 
trust fully in God. I am not suggesting something eccentric,-1 
am urging you to affirm and believe, no matter what happens, 
in this truth: "Lord, it is You alone who can help me."*  So 
many have fallen into ruts of disease and wrong habits and 
have not pulled themselves out. Never say you cannot escape. 
Your misfortune is only for a time. The failure of one life is 
not the measure of whether or not you are a success.  The 
attitude of the conquering man is unafraid: "I am a child of 
God. I have nothing to fear." So fear nothing. Life and death 
are only different processes of your consciousness. 
* "To men who meditate on Me as their Very Own, ever united to Me by in-
cessant worship, I supply their deficiencies and make permanent their gains" 
(Bhagavad Gita EX:22). 

MAN'S GREATEST  ADVENTURE  71 
Everything the Lord has created is to try us, to bring out 
the buried soul immortality within us. That is the adventure 
of life, the one purpose of life. And everyone's adventure is dif-
ferent, unique. You should be prepared to deal with all prob-
lems of health, mind, and soul by commonsense methods and 
faith in God, knowing that in life or death your soul remains 
unconquered. You can never die. "No weapon can pierce the 
soul; no fire can burn it; no water can moisten it; nor can any 
wind wither it... .The soul is immutable, all-permeating, ever 
calm, and immovable."* You are eternally the image of Spirit. 
Is it not freeing to the mind to know that death cannot kill 
us? When disease comes and the body stops working, the soul 
thinks, "I am dead!" But the Lord shakes the soul and says: 
"What is the matter with you? You are not dead. Are you not 
still thinking?" A soldier is walking along and a bomb shatters 
his body. His soul cries, "Oh, I am killed, Lord!" And God says, 
"Of course not! Are you not talking to Me? Nothing can de-
stroy you, My child. You are dreaming." Then the soul realizes: 
"This is not so terrible. It was only my temporary  earthlife 
consciousness of being a physical body that made losing it 
seem the end of me. I had forgotten that I am the eternal soul." 
The Goal of Our Life-Adventure 
True yogis are able to control the mind under all circum-
stances. When that perfection is reached, you are free. Then 
you know life is a divine adventure. Jesus and other great souls 
have proved this. Nothing could touch them. They enjoyed 
uninterruptedly the sweet romance with God. It is the only 
part of the adventure that has any purpose. 
Human love is meaningless unless anchored in the un-
conditional love of God. A boy and a girl fall in love, and after 
a time they fall out of love. Romance with human beings is 
imperfect. The romance with God is perfect and everlasting. 
You will finish this life-adventure only when you conquer 
its dangers by your will power and mind power, as did the 
Great Ones. Then you will look back and say: "Lord, it was a 
pretty bad experience. I came near failing, but now I am in the 
safety of Your presence forever." 
* Bhagavad Gita 11:23-24. 

72  MAN'S ETERNAL QUEST 
We can see life as a wonderful adventure when the Lord 
finally says, "All those terrifying experiences are over. I am 
with you evermore. Nothing can harm you." 
Man is playing at life like a child, but his mind grows 
stronger through fighting sickness and troubles. Anything that 
weakens your mind is your greatest  enemy,  and whatever 
strengthens you mind is your haven. Laugh at any trouble that 
comes. The Lord has shown me that this life is but a dream. 
When you wake up, you will remember it only as a dream of 
joy  and  sorrow  that  has  passed.  You  will  know  you  are 
everlasting in the Lord. 

Self-Analysis:  Key to the 
Mastery of Life 
First Self-Realization Fellowship Temple at 
Encinitas, California, November 6, 1938 
Let us leave the confines of ego and wander in the vast 
fields of soul progress. As time is marching on, so must your 
souls march on to a greater expansion of your life in Spirit. 
The initiative to undertake your most important duty in life 
is often  buried beneath  the  accumulated  debris of  human 
habits. You must free yourselves from their stultifying influ-
ence and start to sow the seeds of the success that you desire. 
Life is worthwhile when you are accomplishing the most es-
sential work, which is to find out the meaning and true values 
of your existence. 
Man should be instructed by this cosmic motion picture 
of life. It is not being shown without a reason. Each day we be-
hold different scenes, and each day has a lesson to teach. You 
are meant to learn the lesson by concentrating on the supreme 
purpose of human existence: to know Who is behind your life. 
Without Self-Analysis, Man Leads Robotlike Life 
Millions of people never analyse themselves.  Mentally 
they are mechanical products of the factory of their environ-
ment, preoccupied with breakfast, lunch, and dinner, working 
and sleeping, and going here and there to be entertained. They 
don't know what or why they are seeking, nor why they never 
realize complete happiness and lasting satisfaction. By evading 
self-analysis, people go on being robots, conditioned by their 
environment. True self-analysis is the greatest art of progress. 
Everyone should learn to analyse himself dispassionately. 
Write down your thoughts and aspirations daily. Find out what 
you are—not what you imagine you are!—because you want 
73 

74  MAN'S ETERNAL QUEST 
to make yourself what you ought to be. Most people don't 
change because they don't see their own faults. 
Everyone is the product of his heredity and environment. 
If you were born in America you reflect distinctive American 
characteristics. If you were born in China or England, you are 
likely to reflect the interests of those nationalities. Your envi-
ronment is the result of your true heredity—the traits and de-
sires acquired by you in past lives. This heredity of past incar-
nations has led to your being born in the particular family and 
environment in which you now find yourself. 
When we read about the families of important people, we 
often note that sons of great men are not necessarily of the 
same mental calibre as their fathers. This failure of biological 
heredity in man raises a great doubt in our minds: why don't 
we find the same results in human life that we observe in the 
plant and animal kingdoms, where good pedigree usually pro-
duces good offspring? We must probe the inner life of man for 
an answer. 
Traits from Past Lives Influence Us Now 
In a literary family it is not unusual to find a boy who 
doesn't like literature at all. He has been brought up with 
literature-loving companions, yet has no affinity for it. Why? 
Environment or heredity in the ordinary sense does not explain 
it. But beyond these factors is reincarnation. We are born into 
a particular family because of certain characteristics that are 
similar. But every person in a family is an individual soul who 
brings his own distinctive traits from his past lives. Hence 
there are always some biological hereditary resemblances in 
families, yet each person is different in character. 
A man takes birth in a certain family, a particular social 
and national environment, owing to specific causes—his own 
past actions. Therefore man is the architect of his own destiny. 
One can almost predict what he will be in his next life by 
analysing his dominant interests and habits in this one. 
Whatever You Have Done, You Can Undo 
So self-analysis is important for the progress of the soul. 
Let us suppose that tragedies have been your favourite reading 

SELF-ANALYSIS: KEY TO THE MASTERY OF LIFE  75 
for many years, and that you naturally feel you will continue 
to enjoy them for the rest of your life. But if you  analyse 
yourself and see that you are becoming morose from constant 
reading of this type of literature, you will wish to form a new 
habit of perusing inspiring spiritual books. By doing so you 
will change the course of your life. We can alter ourselves 
very quickly with strong determination; but without it, one 
does not change effortlessly or in a minute the habit patterns 
of years. To eradicate a habit of long standing you must ap-
ply the full strength of your determination in  counteractiv-
ity until the bad habit is worn out. Most persons don't have 
the necessary patience. But everyone should feel encouraged 
by this truth: whatever you have created or done, you can 
undo. 
When you analyse what you are, have a firm desire to 
banish your weaknesses and to make yourself what you ought 
to be. Don't allow yourself to be overwhelmed with discour-
agement at the revelation of your shortcomings that honest 
self-analysis usually brings. 
Thought Produces Everything in the Universe 
A theory has been advanced that thought is a product of 
the endocrine glands. Such a conception is unfounded. Flesh 
cannot produce thought. Mind is the architect of the micro-
cosm and the macrocosm. As water by cooling and condensa-
tion becomes ice, so thought by condensation assumes physi-
cal form. Everything in the universe is thought in material 
form. The endocrine organ is just a physical structurization of 
a microcosmic thought-blueprint. 
The physical and mental aspects of man are closely inter-
related; it is commonly observed that a person whose liver is 
out of order becomes cranky. When you are bilious, you don't 
feel like smiling and saying "Peace" to everyone! You feel un-
amiable. Your thoughts and emotions are affected by your 
physical state. 
A weakening of the organs has a corresponding weakening 
effect on mental power. Those who eat a great deal of meat are 
often surly and full of vexation. If I were to put you on a grape-
juice diet for a week, it is likely you would feel uplifted and 

76  MAN'S ETERNAL QUEST 
harmoniously disposed toward all/ 
I recently met a man who was wearing just a lightweight 
suit and no overcoat, although it was terribly cold. He said he 
was seventy years old, and that he never feels cold. He didn't 
even  wear  socks!  He  had  accustomed  his  body  to  chilly 
weather. Mind influences body more than vice versa, but the 
bodily  chemicals  do exercise  a constant  influence  on  the 
mind.t Body and mind are interdependent. 
Dreams Reveal the Omnipotence of Mind 
For example, suppose I am dreaming that I am awake and 
in the kitchen, and very hungry. I eat something and drink a 
glass of milk. My hunger and thirst are gone, and I feel satis-
fied. What was the cause of my satisfaction? Was it the food? 
Remember, I am dreaming. Is it not simply a change of thought 
that made me feel satisfied? Since I am dreaming, it is my mind 
that thought it had taken food. The hunger and the food and 
the milk were only ideas in my dream. All were made of the 
same mind-stuff. When I wake up I realize that my experiences 
were nothing but a series of ideas. A mere change of thought 
removed the unpleasant sensation of hunger and substituted 
the pleasant sensation of eating food and drinking milk. So you 
see, thought by itself can do anything. 
Once I was travelling by train when the weather was ex-
tremely hot; the air felt as if it were coming from a furnace. 
* Overeating and improper eating create in the body excessive toxins that have 
a definite negative effect on the mind, making it both sluggish and irritable. 
Occasional fasting on grape or orange juice has a cleansing effect on the 
system, which in turn vitalizes the brain. Such fasts, undertaken one day a 
week, or occasionally for three days at a time, have been found effective in 
helping to keep the body properly cleansed of impurities. Fasting for longer 
than three days at a time should be under the supervision of someone well 
trained in the science of fasting. 
t Serious research on the effect of diet and nutrition on mental health was 
begun many years after Paramahansa Yogananda had made this observation. 
Persons from poverty areas who were denied proper nourishments showed 
decidedly slower mental development and responses. In addition, science has 
shown that some forms of insanity (heretofore considered incurable) im-
proved remarkably with the simple administration of vitamins, and the 
causes of certain forms of depression, anxiety, and other emotions can be 
traced to chemical imbalances in the system. (Publisher's  Note) 

SELF-ANALYSIS: KEY TO THE MASTERY OF LIFE  77 
Everyone around me was suffering, but I was smiling within 
because my mind was dissociated from the thought of  the 
heat. I had said to myself:  "Lord,  the same electricity  that 
makes heat in a furnace makes ice in a refrigerator. Therefore 
why shouldn't I be able to redirect that electricity of Yours to 
produce cold right now?" In that instant I felt as if a sheet of 
ice had enveloped me. 
Change Your Mental Attitude 
We should bear in mind, however, that it is not wise to dis-
regard the body wholly. One should eat proper foods in prefer-
ence to wrong foods. And if you must live with people who 
make you nervous, then once in a while you should change 
your surroundings. But it is better still if you can change your 
mental  environment, so that you won't be disturbed by others' 
actions. Change yourself, and you can then live anywhere in 
peace and happiness. 
Most of the world is like a mental hospital. Some people 
are sick with jealousy, others with anger, hatred, passion. They 
are victims of their habits and emotions. But you can make 
your home a place of peace. Analyse yourself. All emotions are 
reflected in the body and mind. Envy and fear cause the face to 
pale, and love makes it glow. Learn to be calm and you will 
always be happy. 
So remember, whatever type of ego you have,  whatever 
personality you are trying to express, you should make an ef-
fort to analyse your true nature and to develop its best quali-
ties. One may have a moral ego or a patriotic ego or an artistic 
ego or a businessman's ego, and so on. If morality is your ideal, 
live uprightly and express your goodwill to all. That is real 
morality. It is pride that makes self-righteous persons so ready 
to judge those about them who are weak. True morality in-
cludes compassion for others in their ignorant wrongdoings. 
Those who are products of the material ego suffer much 
and needlessly. Such persons should learn self-control;  other-
wise they are just like pieces of matter in action—they have to 
smoke so many times a day, they must eat certain foods, they 
always get a headache if they miss their lunch, they can sleep 
only in a particular kind of bed. It is all right to utilize creature 

78  MAN'S ETERNAL QUEST 
comforts, but never be enslaved by them. 
If you are a cross between an intellectual and a materialis-
tic ego, that is better. But unless you develop and maintain a 
balanced nature—intellectually,  materially, and spiritually— 
you are not going to be happy. Your spiritual intuition tells you 
how to control your life, so that you are not mastered by it. It 
is unwise to let the materialistic ego govern your judgment; 
your conscience and intuition should decide. 
The Conditions of Happiness: Plain Living, High Thinking 
Plain living and high thinking should be your goal. Learn 
to carry all the conditions of happiness within yourself by med-
itating and attuning your consciousness to the ever-existing, 
ever-conscious, ever-new Joy, which is God. Your happiness 
should never be subject to any outside influence.  Whatever 
your  environment  is,  don't  allow  your  inner  peace  to  be 
touched  by  it.  Analyse  yourself;  make  yourself  what  you 
should be and what you want to be. People seldom learn true 
self-control; they do things that are detrimental to their high-
est welfare and think they are making themselves happy; but 
they are not. To be able to do things when and because you 
ought to do them, and to refrain from doing what you know is 
injurious—these are keys to real success and happiness. 
Don't keep your mind engaged in too many  activities. 
Analyse what you get from them, and see if they are really im-
portant. Don't waste your time. To read a good book improves 
you much more than seeing movies. I often say, "If you read 
for one hour, write in your spiritual diary for two hours; and 
if you write for two hours, think for three hours; and if you 
think for three hours, meditate all the time." No matter where 
I go, I keep my mind continuously on my soul peace. You too 
should always point the needle of your attention toward the 
North Pole of spiritual joy. Then no one can ever disturb your 
equilibrium. 
Remember, if each day does not find you a better person 
than you were the day before, you are going backward—in 
health, in mental peace, and in soul joy. Why? Because you 
don't exercise enough control over your actions. You yourself 
made your habits, and you can change them. If you have been 

SELF-ANALYSIS: KEY TO THE MASTERY OF LIFE  79 
thinking wrongly, make up your mind to be with good com-
pany and to study and meditate. A change of company can 
make a great difference to you. When you come here, even for 
these few hours, your mentality changes; you feel a refreshing 
peace. When you go to a dance or a party your mind is often 
restless, nervous, and excited. Afterward, if you enter a differ-
ent, calmer atmosphere, you feel more peaceful again. The 
greatest influence in your life, stronger even than your will 
power, is your environment. Change that, if necessary. Until 
you are mentally strong, you can never be what you want to be 
without a good environment to help you. When you are having 
difficulty in trying to change for the better, spiritual company 
and other uplifting influences are essential. 
Self-analysis is also essential to help you better yourself. If 
you can analyse yourself fearlessly, you will be able to stand 
the critical analysis of others without flinching. 
Those who like to dwell on the faults of others are human 
vultures. There is already too much evil in the world. Don't 
talk of evil, don't think of evil, and don't do evil. Be like a rose, 
wafting to all the sweet  fragrance  of soul goodness.  Make 
everyone feel that you are a friend; that you are a helper, not a 
destroyer. If you want to be good, analyse yourself and develop 
the virtues in you. Banish the thought that evil has any part in 
your nature, and it will drop off. Make everyone else feel that 
you are an image  of God,  not  by your words but  by  your 
behaviour. Emphasize the light, and darkness will be no more. 
Study, meditate, and do good to others. 
Seclusion Is the Price of Greatness 
Seclusion is the price of greatness. Be alone within. Don't 
lead the aimless life that so many persons follow. Meditate and 
read good books more. There are so many inspiring things to 
know, and yet man spends his time foolishly. Happiness will 
never come if you don't concentrate and act on the wisdom of 
great men. Their thoughts are there to help you, in the scrip-
tures and other truthful books. 
So don't waste time, constantly seeking new excitement. 
Once in a while it is all right to go to the movies and have a 
little  social life, but  mostly  remain  apart and live  within 

