OVERCOMING MALIGNANT  MOODS  205 
calmly active you can accomplish anything you set out to do, 
for the mind is clear. 
In addition to not working hard enough for success, most 
people are not mentally active enough. They spend too much 
time not thinking. It is considered to be relaxation. However, 
in true relaxation one is calmly active mentally,- he may reflect 
about God, or about a beautiful peaceful scene, or about some 
pleasant experience. Calm, positive mental activity is revivi-
fying. Yet many people wrongly associate creative effort with 
strain, and go about it with a tense, nervous attitude. 
Moods Get Their Grip on a Vacant Mind 
Creative thinking is the best antidote for moods. Moods 
get their grip on your consciousness when you are in a negative 
or passive state of mind. The time when your mind is vacant 
is  just  the  time  it  can  become  moody;  and when  you  are 
moody,  the  devil  comes  and wields  his  influence  on  you. 
Therefore, develop creative thinking. Whenever you are not 
active physically, do something creative in your mind. Keep it 
so busy that you have no time to indulge in moodiness. 
Creative thinking is marvellous—like living in another 
world. Everyone should develop this power. I think hardly a 
word of my lecture before I come here,- but I get into the con-
sciousness of my subject, and my soul begins to tell me won-
derful things. When you are thinking creatively, you don't feel 
the body or moods; you become attuned with Spirit. Our hu-
man intelligence is made in the image of His creative intelli-
gence, through which all things are possible; and if we don't 
live in that consciousness, we become a bundle of moods. By 
thinking creatively we destroy those moods,- and by thinking 
creatively we will find all the answers to our problems, and to 
the problems of others. 
Moods are like cancer—they eat into the peace of the soul. 
That is why the moody man cannot rid himself of his troubles. 
Remember: no matter how wrong everything has gone for you, 
you have no right to be moody. In your mind  you can be a con-
queror. When bested, the moody man admits defeat. But the 
man whose mind remains unconquered, though the world be 
in cinders at his feet, is yet the victor. 

206  MAN'S ETERNAL QUEST 
Do you want to be a prisoner or a conqueror? By binding 
yourself so tightly in moods, you render yourself incapable of 
going on with the battle of life. As soon as you allow a mood 
to enwrap your mind, your will becomes paralysed. Moods 
befog the brain,  and hence  impair  judgment,  so that  your 
efforts are wasted. 
Moods Are the Brakes on Your Wheels of Progress 
You can conquer your moods, no matter how terrible they 
seem. Make up your mind that you are not going to be moody 
anymore; and if a mood comes in spite of your resolve, analyse 
the cause that brought it on, and do something  constructive 
about it. Don't go on doing things in a state of indifference, if 
that is your attitude, for indifference is the worst of all moods. 
At such times, remind yourself that you are not your own 
creator,- God created you, and He is running this universe for 
you. Whatever your work, do it enthusiastically, for Him. Busy 
yourself in creative activities, for He has given you infinite 
power. How dare you make yourself a mental failure by indul-
gence in the intoxicant of moodiness! Free yourself from these 
devastating mental states. They are the real brakes on  the 
wheels of your progress. Until you release them, you cannot 
move on. Every morning, remind yourself that you are God's 
child, and that no matter what the difficulties, you have the 
power to overcome them. Heir to the cosmic power of Spirit, 
you are more dangerous than danger! 
An  intelligent  boy  does  not  care  to  work  on  simple 
problems; he enjoys the challenge of difficult ones. But many 
people are afraid of life's problems. I have never feared them, 
for I have always prayed: "Lord, may Thy power increase in 
me. Keep me in the positive consciousness that with Thy help 
I can always overcome my difficulties." Think constructively 
about a problem till you cannot think anymore. When I am 
solving a problem, I go to the nth degree to cover all possible 
steps toward its solution, until I can honestly say: "I have 
done my best, and that is all I can do." Then I forget it. 
A  person  who  keeps  the  worry  of  a  problem  in  his 
consciousness becomes moody. Avoid that. When a problem 
comes up, instead of dwelling on it, think of every possible 

OVERCOMING MALIGNANT  MOODS  207 
avenue of action to rid yourself of it. If you are unable to think, 
compare your particular trouble with others' similar troubles, 
and from their experiences learn which ways lead to failure and 
which ways lead to success. Choose those steps that  seem 
logical and practical, and then get busy implementing  them. 
The whole library of the universe is hidden within you. All the 
things you want to know are within yourself. To bring them 
out, think creatively. 
Magical Effect of Sincere Love 
Moods blunt one's feelings and understanding, making it 
impossible to get along with others. Domestic life should be a 
temple of heaven, but moods can make it a hades. A husband 
comes home and finds his wife in a sullen mood, and he can't 
reason with her. Or he returns from work in a nasty mood, and 
she can't reason with him. So much trouble comes to people 
because of moods! 
When someone else in your family is seething with anger, 
or is wholly indifferent, you are affected immediately by his 
mood. Or perhaps you go to someone in great joy, but he is 
moody and quarrelsome, and finally he gives you a slap. Im-
mediately your joy vanishes, and you want to retaliate. Do not 
put on the mood of another. The Bible tells us that if anyone 
smites us on the left cheek, we should turn the right cheek. 
How many do that? More often, the person slapped wants to 
give his assailant twelve slaps in reprisal—and perhaps a kick, 
or even a bullet! It is easy to strike back, but to give love is the 
highest way to try to disarm your persecutor. Even if it doesn't 
work at the time, he will never be able to forget that when he 
gave you a slap, you gave love in return. That love must be 
sincere,- when it comes from the heart, love is magical. You 
should not look for the effects; even if your love is spurned, pay 
no attention. Give love and forget. Don't expect anything; then 
you will see the magical result. 
Do you realize that within you, in your soul, is a superb 
garden? a wondrous garden of thoughts, fragrant with love, 
goodness, understanding, and peace, and more beautiful than 
any earthly flowers that grow. You cultivated a fragrant blos-
som whenever someone in anger misunderstood you and you 

208  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
continuously gave love to him. Isn't the aroma of that love and 
understanding more lasting than that of any rose? So always 
think of your mind as a garden, and keep it beautiful and fra-
grant with divine thoughts; let it not become a mud pond, rank 
with malodorous hateful moods. If you cultivate the heavenly 
scented blooms  of peace  and love,  the  bee  of Christ  Con-
sciousness [Kutastha Chaitanya]*  will steal into your garden. 
As the bee seeks out only those flowers that are sweet with 
honey, so God comes only when your life is sweet with hon-
eyed thoughts. Resolve that in your garden of good soul quali-
ties you will not allow the evil stinkweed of anger to grow. The 
more you develop flowerlike divine qualities, the more God 
will reveal to you His secret omnipresence in your soul. 
"He who is tranquil before friend and foe alike, and in en-
countering adoration and insult, and during the experiences of 
warmth and chill and of pleasure and suffering... that person is 
very dear to Me."+ By continuously giving love to those who 
are unkind, peace to those who are harassed by worries, sweet-
ness to those who are bitter, joy to those who are laden with 
miseries; and by constantly setting a better example for those 
who follow the path of error, you destroy moods by keeping the 
mind creatively busy. If you can't be busy outwardly, be con-
structively busy inwardly. 
Live in a World of Wonder 
I often say: If you read for one hour, write for two hours; 
and if you write for two hours, think for three hours; and if you 
think for three hours, meditate all the time. God is the repos-
itory of all happiness; and you can contact Him in everyday 
life. Yet man mostly occupies himself in pursuits that lead to 
unhappiness. Meditation is the best way to destroy moods and 
live in a world of wonder—a world such as Narada, a great 
rishi, knew when he said: "Lord, I was singing Thy praises, and 
became lost in Thee. When I came back to this consciousness, 
I saw that I had slipped from my old body, and You had given 
me a new one!" 
* God's omnipresent intelligence, and the attractive force of His love, mani-
fested in creation, 
t Bhagavad Gita XII: 18-19. 

OVERCOMING  MALIGNANT  MOODS  209 
A similar story is told in India about another saint. A 
young man had just died. His body had been carried to the 
cremation grounds and the mourners were preparing to light 
the fire, when suddenly an old man came running, crying out, 
"Stop! Don't do it, I will use that body." As soon as he said 
this, the man's aged body dropped lifeless to the ground, and 
the youg man got up from the pyre and ran off toward the for-
est. The old man was a great saint; he had simply not wished 
to interrupt his devotions by taking rebirth in an infant's help-
less body. 
Fear Enters When God Is Shut Out of Life 
There are so many wondrous things to know about life and 
death, and meditation is the way. Learn to live in this world as 
a son of God. Death holds terror for man because he has left 
God out of his life. All painful things frighten us, because we 
love the world without understanding its mystery and purpose. 
But when we behold everything as God, we have nothing to 
fear. We are constantly "born" in life as well as death.  The 
word "death" is a great misnomer, for there is no death; when 
you are tired of life, you simply take off the overcoat of flesh 
and go back to the astral world. * 
Death means an end. A car whose parts are worn out is 
dead; it has come to an end. And so at death the physical body 
comes to an end. But the immortal soul cannot be dead. Every 
night, in sleep, the soul lives without any consciousness of the 
physical body,- but it is not dead. Death is only a greater sleep, 
wherein the soul lives in the astral body without  the  con-
sciousness of the physical body. If loss of physical-body con-
sciousness signified death for man, then the soul would die 
when we go to sleep. But we are not dead when we are asleep; 
nor  are  we  completely  unconscious,  because  when  we 
awaken, we remember whether we slept well or not. So, in the 
afterstate of death we do not die. 
* The Hindu scriptures state that the soul of man is encased successively in 
three bodies: the idea or causal body, a subtle astral body, and a gross physical 
body. The astral world is the subtle realm of finer forces to which the soul, still 
encased in its causal and astral bodies, retires at physical death to continue its 
spiritual education and evolution until it incarnates again on earth. (See glossary.) 

210  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
Those who allow their minds to ossify are truly dying. To 
solve the mystery of life you must be born anew every day. This 
means you must strive daily to improve yourself in some way. 
Above all, pray for wisdom, because with wisdom everything 
else comes. Be controlled not by moods, but by wisdom. And 
with that wisdom, develop creative thinking and activity. Keep 
busy doing constructive  things for your own  self-improve-
ment and for the benefit of others, for whoever would enter 
God's kingdom must try also to do good for others every day. 
If you follow this pattern, you will feel the mood-dispelling joy 
of knowing you are advancing, mentally, physically, and spiri-
tually. You will surely reach God, for that way leads to the 
kingdom of heaven. 
Strive continuously to overcome moods,- for as soon as 
you feel moody, you are cultivating seeds of error in the soil 
of your soul. To indulge in moods is to die gradually,- but if you 
try daily to be cheerful in spite of any upsetting experiences, 
you will have a new birth. Until this human birth becomes 
transmuted into a highly spiritual birth, you cannot be "born 
again"* in God. 
Moods are "catching," and at times of general depression 
can affect large numbers of people. Man should not take life's 
unhappy incidents so seriously. It is better to laugh a little than 
to make a tragedy of every misfortune. The Gita teaches: "He 
who feels neither rejoicing nor loathing toward the glad nor the 
sad (aspects of phenomenal life), who is free from grief and 
cravings, who has banished the relative consciousness of good 
and evil, and who is intently devout—he is dear to Me."t  To 
have an optimistic disposition and try to smile is constructive 
and worthwhile; for whenever you express divine qualities, 
such as courage and joy, you are being born again,- your con-
sciousness is being made new by the manifestation of your true 
soul nature. This is the spiritual rebirth that enables you to 
"see the kingdom of God." 
* "Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God... .Ye must 
be born again" [John 3:3,7, Bible), 
t Bhagavad Gita XII: 17. 

Reincarnation  Can Be 
Scientifically  Proven 
Circa 1926 
If one believes in the existence of a just God, then a belief 
in reincarnation can follow very readily, as the two concepts are 
really dependent on one another. But what about the sceptics 
and the atheists? Can the truth of reincarnation be scientifically 
proven to their satisfaction? Can the theory of reincarnation be 
in any way scientifically experimented with, so as to furnish 
not only hope, but actual proof, of its reality? 
Material scientists claim that they have not found any ac-
tual proof of the existence of a God, and hence cannot offer any 
proof of the existence of His just law, giving equal opportunity 
to all life to improve through reincarnation. To such scientists, 
the sufferings of innocent babies and other inequities of life 
seem inexplicable, and point to the absence of a just Creator. 
Scientific Law 
On the other hand, most of those who do believe in a just 
God base their convictions on belief only, and have no scien-
tific proof to offer to unbelievers. They do not dare, for the 
most part, to scrutinize or deeply question their faith, for fear 
of losing it or of creating some social inharmony. They are not 
aware, in other words, of the existence of a scientific spiritual 
law that can prove their beliefs to be truth. 
Buy why should not spiritual law be investigated by the 
same methods of experimentation used by the material scien-
tist to discover physical truths? This question was asked cen-
turies ago by the Hindu savants, and they set about the task of 
answering it. Their experiments resulted in scientific methods 
that  can  be followed  by anyone  to  discover  the  reality  of 
211 

212  MAN'S ETERNAL QUEST 
spiritual law, and hence of reincarnation and every other great 
cosmic truth. 
Since the means of proof do exist, no one has a right to say 
that reincarnation and other spiritual laws do not operate, until 
he has tried the methods and seen the results for himself. A 
doubting physical scientist is entitled to express his opinion, 
but it remains an opinion only, not a fact. In physical science, 
certain procedures must be adopted and followed in order to 
prove the truth of any given theory. Germs are not visible to 
the naked eye  one must use a microscope  to detect  their 
;
presence. If a person refuses to look through the microscope, 
he cannot be said to have scientifically tested the theory that 
germs are present. His opinion is therefore valueless, since he 
has not followed the prescribed rules for arriving at the truth 
of the theory. So it is in spiritual matters. The method has been 
discovered, the rules laid down, and the result is open to any-
one who is interested enough to experiment. In the Western 
world, owing to lack of this scientific approach to spiritual law, 
the value of religion has been greatly diminished as a vital 
factor in the life of man, and spiritual doctrines are believed in 
or rejected simply on the grounds of personal bias, rather than 
as a result of scientific investigation. 
How Were the Spiritual Laws Discovered? 
How did the spiritual scientists (rishis) of ancient India 
discover these unalterable cosmic laws? Through experiment 
on the life and thought of man, in the laboratories of their 
hermitages.  To find the truth of physical  things,  we  must 
experiment with physical substances. So, to find the truth of 
reincarnation, or the passage of the same soul through many 
bodies, it is necessary to experiment upon the consciousness 
of man. These scientists of old found that the human ego per-
sists through all changes of experience and thought during the 
states of wakefulness, dream, and dreamless sleep during one's 
lifetime. The cognitive experiences changed, the environment, 
sensations, thoughts, and bodily states changed, but the sense 
of identity, of "I," did not change from birth to death. The 
Hindu experimentalists argued that through concentration on 
the self, through a constant,  conscious, aloof,  unidentified 

REINCARNATION  CAN BE SCIENTIFICALLY PROVEN  213 
introspection  or watching of the various changing states of 
life—of wakefulness, dreaming, or dreamless sleep—that one 
could perceive the changeless  and eternal nature of the self. 
Ordinarily, one is conscious of his waking state, and some-
times  he is conscious  also of his  dreaming  state.  It is  not 
uncommon, during a dream, for a person to be aware that he 
is dreaming. Through certain methods and practices, one can 
maintain conscious awareness during every state of his being: 
wakefulness,  dreaming, dreamless sleep, and turiya,  "deep 
sleep," the ever-awake superconsciousness  (the unrestricted 
region of mind) beyond dreamless  subconsciousness. 
Relaxation in Sleep 
During sleep, there is involuntary relaxation  of energy 
from the motor and sensory nerves. Through practice, one can 
produce this relaxation during the waking state also, at will. In 
the big sleep of death, there is total relaxation—the retirement 
of energy from the heart and cerebrospinal axis. By deep medi-
tation, this complete relaxation may be produced consciously 
in the waking state. In other words, every involuntary function 
may be accomplished voluntarily and consciously by practice. 
The rishis of ancient India analysed death as the  with-
drawal of the electricity of life from the bulb of human flesh 
with its wires of sensory and motor nerves that lead to the 
different channels of outward expression. Just as electricity 
does not die when it is withdrawn from a broken bulb, so life 
energy is not annihilated when it retires from the involuntary 
nerves. Energy cannot die. It withdraws, upon the occasion of 
death, into the Cosmic Energy. 
Current Withdrawn 
In  sleep,  the  conscious  mind  ceases  to  operate—the 
current is temporarily withdrawn from the nerves. In death, 
the human consciousness permanently ceases to express itself 
through the body,- it is as though one had a paralysed arm—he 
is mentally conscious of that arm, but cannot function through 
it. Medical records describe the case of a clergyman who once 
fell into a state of suspended animation. He heard everyone 
around bewailing his apparent death, but could not express his 

214  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
awareness through his physical organs. His body motor had 
"stalled" and refused to respond to his mental commands. Af-
ter he had passed twenty-four hours in this state,  and was 
about to be taken away for burial, he made a supreme effort 
and was able to move. This instance illustrates the constancy 
of the awareness of "I-ness" or personal identity, even though 
the body is seemingly lifeless. 
The rishis taught that one must learn to separate the en-
ergy and consciousness from the body, consciously. One must 
consciously watch the state of sleep, and must practise con-
scious voluntary withdrawal  of energy from the heart  and 
spinal regions. Thus he learns to do consciously what death 
will otherwise force upon him unconsciously and unwillingly. * 
An Amazing Case 
There is a case on record, in the files of French and other 
European doctors, of a man named Sadhu Haridas—in  the 
court of Emperor Ranjit Singh of India—who was able to sep-
arate his energy and consciousness from his body and then con-
nect the two again after several months. His body was buried 
underground and watch was kept over the sopt, day and night, 
for months. At the end of this time, his body was exhumed and 
examined by the European doctors, who pronounced him dead. 
After a few minutes, however, he opened his eyes and regained 
control over all the functions of his body; and lived for many 
years more. He had learned, by practice, how to control all the 
involuntary functions of his body and mind. He was a spiritual 
scientist who experimented with prescribed methods for learn-
ing the truth of cosmic law. As a result he was in a position to 
demonstrate the truth of the theory of the changelessness of 
personal identity and the eternal nature of the life principle. 
* The life energy enters the body at the medulla, is stored in the reservoir of 
the cerebrum, and then descends into five other centres of life and conscious-
ness in the spine, whence it is distributed to the organs of sensory perceptions 
and to all other parts of the body. At death, the life energy retires irrevocably 
into the spine and leaves the body through the medulla. The accomplished yogi 
can voluntarily and consciously withdraw the life energy from the body and 
senses into the spine, directing it upward to the highest centres of divine per-
ceptions, where he is joyously aware of being "dead"—freed from sensory delu-
sions of being limited to a purely physical existence. 

REINCARNATION  CAN BE SCIENTIFICALLY  PROVEN  215 
Those who want to prove for themselves the  scientific 
truth of the doctrine of reincarnation should first prove the 
principle of continuity of consciousness after death by learning 
the art of consciously separating the soul from the body. * This 
can be done by following the rules laid down many centuries 
ago by the Hindu savants: Learn (1) to be conscious during 
sleep, (2) to be able to produce dreams at will, (3) to disconnect 
the five senses consciously, not passively as during sleep, and 
(4) to control the action of the heart, which is to experience 
conscious death, or the suspended animation of the body (but 
not of the consciousness) that occurs during the higher states 
of superconsciousness. 
Follow the Practices 
Bhagavan Krishna taught: "The ego is continuously con-
spious of itself in childhood, youth, and old age,- the embodied 
soul is uninterruptedly conscious not only of these states but 
also of attaining another body after death (in the long series of 
'lives' and 'deaths' that are the ego's alternations between the 
physical and astral worlds), "t 
By following the practices that lead to the four states out-
lined above, we can follow the ego in all states of existence— 
we can follow it consciously through death, through space, to 
other bodies or other worlds. Those who do not learn these 
things cannot retain their sense of personal identity, of aware-
ness or consciousness, during the big sleep of death, and hence 
cannot remember any previous state, or even the "deep sleep" 
states during one life. 
By adopting the methods of the ancient Hindu scientists 
who experimented with such laws, and who thereby gave the 
world a knowledge that is priceless and demonstrable, one may 
come to know the scientific truth of reincarnation and all other 
eternal verities. 
* The Christian mystic St. Paul understood and demonstrated this mastery of 
life and death; he declared: "...I die daily" [I Corinthians  15:31, Bible), 
t  Bhagavad Gita 11:13. 

Reincarnation:  The Soul's 
Journey to  Perfection 
Self-Realization Fellowship Temple, 
Hollywood, California, February 20, 1944 
Reincarnation is the progress of a soul through many lives 
on the earth plane, as through so many grades in a school, 
before it "graduates" to the immortal perfection of oneness with 
God. Souls that are living in an imperfect state (unaware of 
their divine identity with Spirit) do not, upon the death of the 
physical body, automatically enter a state of God-realization. 
We are made in the image of God, but by identification  with 
the  physical  body,  we  have  put  on  its  imperfections  and 
limitations.  Until  this  imperfect  human  consciousness  of 
mortality is removed, we cannot become gods again. 
A prince ran away from his palatial home and sought shel-
ter in a slum. As a result of intoxication and of mixing with 
persons of bad character, he gradually lost sight of his  true 
identity. Not until his father found him and took him home to 
the palace did he remember that he was actually a prince. 
Similarly, we are all children of the King of the Universe 
who have run away from our spiritual home. We have kept our-
selves locked up in human bodies for so long that we have for-
gotten our divine heritage. As often as we have come on earth 
we have developed new imperfections and new desires. So we 
come back here again and again until we fulfill all desires; or 
until, through increase of wisdom, we banish those desires. We 
must satisfy our desires, or, by cultivating wisdom, do away 
with them altogether. Very few persons get off the wheel of 
birth and death by trying to satisfy their desires, however; it is 
the  nature  of desire  that  each  time  one  "satisfies"  it,  the 
216 

REINCARNATION:  THE SOUL'S JOURNEY TO  PERFECTION  217 
craving to repeat the experience simply increases its hold, 
unless one's mind is very strong. * 
It is better to satisfy small or unimportant desires, because 
in that way we can get rid of them. But it is necessary to do so 
with wisdom and discrimination,- otherwise even small desires 
may come back in a stronger way, reinforced by experience. 
People who feel a desire to drink, for example, often "reason" 
thus: "I will have all I want today, and tomorrow I will do 
without." After several repetitions of this experience, the usual 
result is that they find they have instilled a habit, and then it 
is difficult to get rid of it. The same thing may happen with any 
other desire. 
God is not a dictator who has sent us here and is telling us 
what to do. He has given us free will to do as we please. We 
hear a great deal about the importance of being good. But if we 
all go straight to heaven when we die (as some claim), what is 
the point in trying to do good while we are here? If there is the 
same reward for everyone at the end of life, why not be a 
greedy, selfish person, since the path of evil is often the easiest 
one to take? There would be no use in emulating the lives of 
great  saints  if when we die we all—the  good and the bad 
alike—become angels. 
On the other hand, if God has it in His plan for us all to go 
to Hades, again there would be no use in worrying about how 
we behave in this life. And would there be any value in watch-
ing one's actions if our lives are like automobiles—once they 
become old they are cast on the junk pile and that is the end of 
them? If that is all there is to man's life there is no point in 
reading the scriptures or in exercising self-control. 
The Importance of Time 
If, however, there is a lofty purpose in living, how may we 
explain the seeming injustice in a baby's being born dead? 
What about those who are born blind or dumb or crippled; or 
who live only a few years and then die? Only the one who lives 
* "The Cod-united yogi, abandoning attachment to fruits of actions, attains 
the peace unshakable (peace born of self-discipline). Then man who is not 
united to Cod is ruled by desires; through such attachment he remains in 
bondage" (Bhagavad Gita V:12). 

218  MAN'S ETERNAL QUEST 
long has time to struggle against innate wrong tendencies and 
desires, and to try to be good. If there is no other chance (in a 
future life) for the little child who dies at six months, why did 
God give that child a mind and no time in which to develop the 
potentialities of that mind? The time element is most impor-
tant in our progress. One life-span only may not afford suffi-
cient time. 
If a child dies early in life, there is a reason for that death; 
and because he did not have enough time in which to express 
his  potential,  human  or  divine,  he  will  be  given  another 
opportunity in which to do so. Such a person is like a boy who 
is sick and cannot go to school. The boy does not leave school 
forever; as soon as he is well he goes back to school to start his 
lessons where he left off. So it is with life. If we don't have a 
chance to learn our lessons in this life, we shall have opportu-
nities to learn them in some other. 
When you can see "behind the scenes" you will realize 
that life on earth is a puppet show. It seems real to us now, but 
what we are experiencing at this moment will have a dream-
like unreality to us a few years hence. And what we are expe-
riencing now would have seemed unreal to us five years ago, 
had it been described to us then. Last Sunday most of you sat 
in other seats in the temple, and had other thoughts in your 
mind. Today we are seeing a different "picture show." Reflect 
on how many people you have known who are now vanished 
from this earthly stage. 
The concept of life as a changing, passing show is not pes-
simistic;  it should teach us not to take life seriously at all. 
Maya, cosmic delusion, makes us feel that the body is so real, 
such a necessary part of our being. Yet in a moment the body 
may be taken away from the soul by death, and the separation 
is not painful at all. When that "operation" is over, you have 
no need of time, dress, food, or shelter, for you no longer have 
to carry this bodily bundle of flesh. You are free of it. And you 
are still you. Have you ever sought to reason out why this truth 
is hidden? Or where may be now the millions of people who 
have gone away from our earth? Have you ever wondered if we 
are like so many chickens in a coop—when we are gone from 

REINCARNATION: THE SOUL'S JOURNEY TO PERFECTION  219 
the coop we are replaced by another flock? Is there no way to 
find out? 
How We Live This Life Determines What We Are in the Next 
We have been given the power to reason out where we go 
and whence we have come. But we don't take enough pains to 
analyse ourselves and our lives. Otherwise our common sense 
would tell us that whatever our character is today it will con-
tinue  to be after  death—perhaps  a little better  or a  little 
worse,  depending  on  how  much  effort  we  are  making  to 
improve ourselves. You go along 365 days a year, year after year, 
and perhaps you have made some progress,- but your nature 
will be the same after death as it was before death. You will 
not become  an angel just because you die! Only  the body 
changes. Death makes no difference, otherwise. Death is like 
a gate you will pass through. Your body will be gone but you 
will be in every other respect the same. If you have a violent 
temper, you will not leave it behind, at death, with your phys-
ical body. Your violent temper will remain with you until you 
conquer it. If in your present life you have observed the laws 
of healthful living, in your next incarnation you will possess 
a healthy body. The last portion of life is more important than 
the first, because what you are at the end of this life is what 
you will be at the beginning of the next. 
The first part of life is usually stupidly misspent, in a sort 
of bewildered state. Then romance comes, and finally disease 
and old age,- the struggle with the body starts. I have coined a 
phrase, "patchwork living," to describe how one has to keep on 
patching and repatching the body to keep it going. The body is 
a trouble most of the time: a "spark plug" is missing, or the 
"tires" give out; you have headaches or a cold, or the stomach 
goes wrong;  there  is  difficulty  with  the  teeth,  and so  on. 
Always trouble, trouble! That is why it is so necessary to your 
happiness that you realize you are not the body, with all its 
aches and pains, but an immortal soul. 
I don't take life seriously at all. I say, "Lord, anytime you 
want to remove this body from the soul, it is all right. So long 
as you keep me here, all right; but if I am to be free of the body, 
that is all right too." It is not necessary to die in order to claim 

220  MAN'S ETERNAL QUEST 
freedom from attachment to the body. If you commune with 
God you will see that you are already free. You are not  the 
body. You are eternal Spirit. 
Is there any way to find out what  we were in our  last 
incarnation? Most certainly we can detect basic tendencies of 
thought and capabilities, by analysing what we are now. The 
Hindu scriptures say that it takes a million years of harmo-
nious, disease-free living for the soul to be liberated. Therefore, 
comparatively little change is to be expected in the ordinary 
man from life to life. But one's spiritual evolution may defi-
nitely be hastened by determined effort in right living and by 
the help of a true guru. 
The sages of India have analysed mankind as belonging to 
four basic types: the Sudras, those capable of offering service to 
society through bodily labour,- the Vaisyas,  those who serve 
through mentality, skill, agriculture, trade, commerce,  busi-
ness life in general; the Kshatriyas, those whose talents are ad-
ministrative, executive, and protective—rulers and warriors; 
and the Brahmins,  those of contemplative nature, spiritually 
inspired and inspiring. 
Qualitatively, Sudras  are those who see in life no greater 
purpose than the satisfaction of wants and desires of the body; 
such persons eat, sleep, work, multiply, and finally die. Mil-
lions today live in the Sudra  or "labourer"  state—concerned 
merely with the comfort and pleasure of the body. 
The man in the Vaisya or mentally active state is always 
busy getting things done. Some people of this class think of 
nothing else but business,- they live only to earn money, which 
they  usually  squander  on  sense  enjoyments.  But  the  best 
Vaisya type of businessman is much more evolved and creative 
in nature. 
The third or Kshatriya  class are those who, after having 
had the experience of earning money and of creating something 
along business lines, begin to understand what life is all about; 
they strive by self-control to win the battle with the senses. 
(The Vaisya man doesn't engage himself in such effort for inner 
improvement. He simply earns money and produces children 
and seldom thinks about the meaning of life except in terms of 

REINCARNATION:  THE SOUL'S JOURNEY TO PERFECTION  221 
business.) But the third or Kshatiiya  class takes  life  more 
seriously.  Such a man asks himself,  "Should I not  struggle 
with and destroy my bad habits?" He feels a desire to overcome 
evil tendencies and to do what is right. 
The last and highest state is that of the Brahmin:  knower 
of Brahma or God. * 
Analyse Yourself to See How You Should Change 
To recapitulate the four basic types of consciousness  in 
man: Sudra is the sense-bound state of existence; Vaisya is the 
business or creative stage of man. Kshatriya  is the  warrior 
state, when man desires to do battle with his senses and to con-
quer his attachment  to them. Brahmin  is the wisdom  state, 
attained by man when he has overcome all attachment to the 
senses and remains consciously immersed in Brahma, God. 
Every human being fits into one of these four classifica-
tions,  and if you analyse yourself you can find your  class. 
Think over your life from childhood days and try to reason out 
in which  of the four classifications  you belong. Reflect  on 
whether you have been living for sense pleasures, only cater-
ing to the senses and earning money; or perhaps just working 
without thinking or acting creatively. 
Analyse yourself and see if you have been creative from 
your childhood.  Some  children,  for example,  think  readily 
along mechanical lines, and want to open up and take apart 
things so that they can put them together again. Others show 
the greatest pleasure in drawing, or in playing or listening to 
music. It is not necessary to be an expert or a prima donna in 
order to consider that one has shown signs of creativity in this 
life. Even a nonsensical song such as "Yes, We Have No Ba-
nanas" is a product of a creative mind. 
Anything one creates, whether it is expertly done or not, 
is an expression of creative talent. A flair for writing novels or 
for acting or for woodcarving or for painting or for music or for 
working with machinery, if exhibited early in life,  indicates 
that you were probably in the Vaisya state in your past life. 
Husbands and wives should not ridicule each other's or 
their children's  creative  tendencies.  It is a sin against  the 
* See caste in glossary. 

222  MAN'S ETERNAL QUEST 
evolutionary  process  of  God  to  try  to  suppress  another's 
creative spirit. 
Ask yourself if from childhood you have always tried to 
perform actions in accordance with the guidance of your con-
science. Were you constantly watching your actions and trying 
to correct yourself when you were wrong? Did you have that 
struggle within  from childhood?  That  reflects  the third  or 
Kshatriya  state. But if from childhood your thoughts  have 
always been of God, you have entered the fourth or spiritual 
state of the Brahmin. 
Recognition of your belonging to one of the less advanced 
of these four types of mental attitude should not  discourage, 
but encourage you. If upon self-analysis you find that you have 
not yet attained to the highest state, do not think yourself help-
lessly unfortunate. The idea is that if you haven't changed yet, 
it is now time that you should. Otherwise you will carry your 
present state into the next life too. When death comes you 
want to feel that you have passed that particular "grade" of life, 
and that you are free to go on to higher grades. Therefore you 
should change your life now. Analyse yourself and learn what 
you were before. Then you can begin to remould your life more 
ideally. 
Learn to check your moods. The violent feelings you may 
experience in the present were all created in the past. If it were 
not so, why is it that some children are jealous from the very 
beginning, while others in the same family are calm and loving? 
There are children who would strike you if you were to tell 
them not to do a thing; others are quietly obedient. Another 
child may steal. Why? These traits are simply outcroppings of 
prenatal tendencies created in former lives. 
I was once given a little baby to hold. I almost dropped it, 
for God suddenly revealed to me that that baby had been a 
cruel murderer in a previous life. But ordinarily, the past is a 
closely guarded secret. You may discover the true details only 
if the Lord wishes you to know them. 
Discern Between Inner Worth and Outer Position 
Once, in New York, a woman who was helping with Self-
Realization Fellowship office work confided to me that she had 

REINCARNATION: THE SOUL'S JOURNEY TO PERFECTION  223 
met a marvellous man, a "psychic," who had told her wonder-
ful things about herself, including the revelation  that  in a 
former life she had been Mary, Queen of Scots. I did not believe 
she had been that queen, and I silently uttered a little prayer 
that God would banish her delusion. 
A few days later a student came to see me and, with great 
excitement, said, "I have just met a famous psychic (the same 
one the office worker had mentioned), who told me that in a 
past life I was Mary, Queen of Scots." I asked the office worker 
to come into the room; and, placing the two "queens" face to 
face, I asked, "Which one of you is the real  Mary, Queen of 
Scots?" The ladies, happily, realized their mistake—which was 
one of undiscriminating credulity and of readiness to confuse 
true inner worth with conspicuous outer position. 
The truth is, we love to be flattered. Unscrupulous persons 
thus may take advantage of us now and then. But who you were 
in a previous life and whether or not you were important in the 
eyes of the world is of little consequence. It is best to be born 
as a divine or Brahmin  type, regardless of worldly position. All 
of you have something of that divine type in you; otherwise you 
would not be here this morning. 
Exchange of Souls Between East and West 
Out of millions of people, you have been drawn to  this 
temple, because you have had something to do with the Orient 
and its spiritual teachings before. Now that you are an Occi-
dental,  outwardly,  other Occidentals  may laugh at you for 
going to what may seem to them a "heathen" church. Those 
who feel a prejudice against the East did not recently  come 
from there; but those who feel a leaning toward the East were 
probably born there in a recent past life. By such  indications 
one can distinguish Oriental and Occidental souls. Did you 
from early childhood enjoy the fragrance of incense, and stories 
and pictures of the East? Such inclinations would show that 
you had been quite recently in contact with the Orient. 
Many souls from the East have reincarnated now in Amer-
ica. Desiring material perfection, they have been born here to 
enjoy  the  fulfillment  of that  desire  and to help  encourage 
American spiritual ideals. Similarly, many souls that formerly 

224  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
were born in America have since reincarnated in India in order 
to benefit from her spiritual riches and to help India in the 
development of the material side of her civilization. I hope that 
many of you may go there to help India, and that many in In-
dia will come here to serve in America. This world is God's 
family. He is trying to improve all nations. He has no prefer-
ence for one over another. 
Another test of your past is your preference for certain sen-
sations. Some people like heat all the time. They have become 
accustomed, in other lives, to warm climates. Others like cold 
better, which shows that they had been born in cold climates 
before. If you have always had a special feeling for the moun-
tains, or the sea, you may be certain you brought that attach-
ment from another life. There are people who become lonely if 
they are out of the city, and cannot stand quiet places. That 
attitude too was cultivated in the past. 
Those who have a driving ambition throughout life were 
important men before. To have that tendency and not develop 
it is to suppress oneself. In the proper environment such a per-
son could become a great man. There are others who remain 
unsuccessful, no matter what they do to get ahead. This indi-
cates they have carried a failure tendency from the past. But 
they should not give up the battle to overcome it. Such persons 
must conquer wrong tendencies now or they will  manifest 
those faults in the next incarnation. 
George Eastman once told me that in the early years of his 
Kodak company he offered stock for twenty-five cents a share; 
still it wouldn't sell. The family of the girl he wished to marry 
objected to the match. The adverse circumstances were such 
that it seemed he would never become a success; yet, after a 
while, everything opened up for him. Why? Because he had 
been creative and ambitious before, and he kept on cultivating 
those tendencies in this life. 
From childhood I wished for large buildings and many peo-
ple about me, and for shady trees and water wherever I might 
go. And these are what I attract. I also knew from childhood 
that I would have such things; that when I wished and worked 
for it, these places would come easily to me. When I talked 
about it, people sometimes laughed sceptically. Nevertheless, 

REINCARNATION: THE SOUL'S JOURNEY TO PERFECTION22 5 
such environments have materialized. At our Ranchi  school 
we have a big pond; our Dakshineswar headquarters faces the 
Ganges River; our Encinitas hermitage overlooks the Pacific 
Ocean.* 
So, through analysis of your present strong tendencies you 
can pretty accurately surmise that kind of life you led before. 
Past Associations Influence Present Affinities 
You may find that you have a strong affinity to certain for-
eign languages and that you are able to learn them  quickly. 
Madame Galli-Curci, for example, amazed me by the ease with 
which she learned many phrases in Bengali. A love of certain 
languages is the result of past-life associations. You are attracted 
to German or French or Chinese or Bengali because you have 
spoken them before. 
Recently I met a young American girl who told me,  "I 
have never studied any Oriental language, but lots of times I 
hear strange words in my mind. I can say them, but I don't 
know what they mean." She forthwith said about nine words 
in Bengali. She had never in this life studied the language, nor 
had she known anyone who spoke Bengali. Yet she knew these 
words and pronounced them correctly. 
In travelling, you begin to like certain scenes more than 
others. If some place stands out above all the rest in its attrac-
tion for you, you have probably been in that vicinity before. 
So by these various clues you may discover certain general 
ideas about your past lives. From this point on, meditation can 
bring about a deeper knowledge of what you were before. 
Occasionally it happens that you go for the first time to a 
certain place where you seem to recognize certain scenes; but 
*  The school in Ranchi, Jharkhand, was founded in 1918 on the estate prop* 
erty of the generous-hearted Maharaja of Kasimbazar. Yogoda Math, head-
quarters of Yogoda Satsanga Society of India, was founded at Dakshineswar, 
Kolkata, in 1939. The Hermitage overlooking the Pacific Ocean in Encini-
tas,  California,  was  a  gift  to  Paramahansa  Yogananda  from  Rajarsi 
Janakananda (James J. Lynn) in 1936. Rajarsi Janakananda,  a spiritually 
exalted disciple of Paramahansa Yogananda, succeeded Paramahansaji as 
president of Yogoda Satsanga Society of India/Self-Realization Fellowship in 
1952. (Publisher's  Note) 

226  MAN'S ETERNAL QUEST 
the people whom you once associated with those scenes are 
gone. And sometimes you meet people you feel you knew be-
fore. With me, recognition has always been instant, especially 
of those who had been disciples before. * 
The following authentic case of remembrance of a past-life 
experience became world famous. A little girl, born in a small 
village in India, began inexplicably to pine away for a village in 
another part of India. Her condition became so serious that a 
doctor advised that she be taken to the distant village.  This 
was done, and to the amazement of her companions, from the 
moment she entered the outskitrs of the village she began to 
describe in detail everything in it. She knew people by their 
names (although she had never before been to this village), and 
went directly to a certain home where she called a man by 
name, saying that he had been her brother in her previous life. 
Nor did she stop there. She explained that in her past incarna-
tion she had hidden some gold pieces in a brick wall of the 
same house, but that she had died without ever having told 
anyone about it. The little girl went to the place in the wall, 
and lo!  the gold pieces  were  there  still.  She  described  her 
clothes and how they had been packed away, and they were 
found to be exactly as she had said. In the face of such evi-
dence, we are not justified in doubting the genuineness and sig-
nificance of her experience. 
There is another case of a saint in India who went to a cer-
tain temple on a riverbank and said: "My temple was near here. 
It is now in the river." Divers went down, and found under the 
water a very old temple. This man had been, in a previous life, 
the saint to whom the now submerged temple had been dedi-
cated. 
A Pure Heart—A Clear Insight 
If you keep above the consciousness of sex, and make your 
heart pure, so that when you look at others you will not be 
conscious of whether they are men or women, you will be able 
always to recognize at once those souls you have known be-
fore. If you have cultivated that impersonal consciousness you 
* Those who received spiritual initiation from Paramahansa Yogananda in past 
incarnations. (Publisher's  Note) 

REINCARNATION: THE SOUL'S JOURNEY TO PERFECTION 
227 
can instantly recognize people you knew before. Suppose you 
see a six-month-old baby, and then do not see it again until 
many years have gone by and the baby has become a man. You 
probably do not recognize that baby in the man. Yet certain fea-
tures are the same, you would disover, if you had known that 
baby long enough to fix those features firmly in your mind. So, 
certain features of our past life remain with us. The eyes espe-
cially will be like they were before. Eyes hardly change because 
they are the windows of the soul. Those whose eyes reflect 
anger or fear or wickedness should try to change, to remove 
unlovely qualities that hide and hinder the expression of the 
beauty of the soul. Owing to the change of environment and 
company, your mind and body change somewhat. But the eyes 
change  little.  You are reborn  with  the  same  expression  in 
them. 
You can also tell by your inclinations if you were a man or 
a woman in your past existence. Many women are mannish, 
and many men want to be like women. 
Both man and woman are equal in importance.  Reason 
and feeling are present in both men and women. But in man 
reason predominates, and in woman feeling predominates. It 
is easier to influence a man by appealing to his reason than to 
his feeling; a woman responds more readily to an appeal to her 
emotions. 
By God-communion you bring about the harmony or bal-
ance of these two qualities within yourself. I never acknowledge 
myself to be either man or woman. I feel for others with the 
love of a mother, but no one can dissuade me by an appeal to 
my emotions if my reason, or fatherly nature, does not concur. 
To achieve a divine balance of reason and feeling should be the 
purpose of both man and woman. Man usually has to cultivate 
more feeling, and woman has to cultivate more logic. 
We Must Perfect Love in at Least One Relationship 
There is a deep reason why God does not usually allow us 
to recall our previous lives. It is because we would be very 
clannish with those we knew before, instead of expanding our 
love to encompass others. God wants us to give friendship and 
love to all, but we must perfect  it in at least one relationship. 

228  MAN'S ETERNAL QUEST 
When you meet old friends again, you can perfect your love in 
relationships with them. A disciple means one in whom  the 
guru perfects the state of divine friendship. Those who follow 
the guru's wishes are his disciples. The wishes of a true guru 
are guided by divine wisdom,  and if you tune  in  with  his 
wishes you will become free, as he himself is free. * 
Above all, you should learn the most you can from this 
life, and strive to pass to the highest grade of spiritual devel-
opment in the school of life. Commune with God. When you 
can do that, the deficiencies of all lesser grades of living are for-
given. To free yourself from karma that binds you to the lesser 
duties of life, develop wisdom and God-consciousness. 
*  "If ye continue in my words, then are ye my disciples indeed, and ye shall 
know the truth, and the truth shall make you free" [John 8:31-32, Bible). "Men, 
devotion-filled, who ceaselessly practise My precepts, without fault-finding, 
they too become free from all karma" (Bhagavad Gita 111:31). 

Will Jesus Reincarnate Again? 
First Self-Realization Fellowship Temple at 
Encinitas, California, November 26, 1939 
Many persons predict a second coming of Christ. Others 
think that the real Christ has yet to come a first time.  But 
Jesus did come on earth, and he went away. These are facts. 
Had his life been only a myth,  as some  say, his  influence 
would not have survived for so many centuries. Even though 
he was crucified, his mission was taken up by people all over 
the world, because he lived for God. 
"Behold, he cometh with clouds; and every eye shall see 
him."* Because of this passage in the Bible, many sincere per-
sons believe that Christ is literally going to descend out of the 
clouds to us. The real explanation is metaphysical. When you 
close your eyes you behold darkness, but behind that darkness 
is the inner light. The contrast epitomizes the difference be-
tween this world and the kingdom of God. 
When I close my eyes and concentrate my will, I see Christ 
in that light;! and every true devotee who is able to penetrate 
the spiritual eye shall see him. In that inner light I behold Jesus 
just as clearly as I see another person in this world. Everything 
perceived in that light is much finer. Wonderful visions  of 
saints come—if you are in earnest, and if you have developed 
spiritually. Such experiences are not given to those who med-
itate just for a few minutes and then concentrate on something 
else. When you really "mean business" with God, and above 
all, love Him,- when you willingly lose sleep in order to persist 
in your search for Him, then you begin to see divine visions. 
* Revelation  1:7. 
t The light of the spiritual eye between the eyebrows. "The light of the body 
is the eye: if therefore thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of light" 
[Matthew  6:22). 
229 

