80  MAN'S ETERNAL QUEST 
yourself. Happiness depends on meditation, on knowing great 
minds through their thoughts in books, and on surrounding 
yourself with people who are noble and kind. Enjoy solitude,-
but when you want to mix with others, do so with all your 
love and friendship, so that those persons cannot forget you, 
but remember always that they met someone who inspired 
them and turned their minds toward God. 

Healing by God's Unlimited Power 
Self-Realization Fellowship Temple, 
Hollywood, California, August 31, 1947 
There are three kinds of illness: physical, mental, and spir-
itual. Physical sickness is due to different forms of toxic con-
ditions, infectious disease, and accidents. Mental sickness is 
caused by fear, worry, anger and other emotional inharmonies. 
Soul sickness is due to man's ignorance of his true relationship 
with God. 
Ignorance is the supreme  disease.  When  one  banishes 
ignorance he also banishes the causes of all physical, mental, 
and spiritual disease. My guru, Sri Yukteswarji,  often  said, 
"Wisdom is the greatest  cleanser." 
Trying to overcome various kinds of suffering by the lim-
ited power of material curative methods is often disappointing. 
Only in the unlimited power of spiritual methods may man 
find a permanent  cure for the "dis-ease"  of body, mind, and 
soul. That boundless power of healing is to be sought in God. 
If you have suffered mentally over the loss of loved ones, you 
can find them again in God. All things are possible with His 
help. 
Unless one really knows God, he is not justified in saying 
that only mind exists,  and that  one does not need to  obey 
health laws or to use any physical aids for healing. Until actual 
realization is attained, one should use his common sense in all 
he does. At the same time one should never doubt God, but 
should constantly affirm his faith in God's omnipresent divine 
power. 
Doctors try to learn the causes of disease and to remove 
those causes so that the illnesses do not recur. In their use of 
many specific material methods of cure, doctors are often very 
skillful. However, not every disease responds to medicine and 
81 

82  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
surgery,  and therein  lies  the  essential  limitation  of  these 
methods. 
Chemicals and medicines affect only the outer physical 
composition  of the bodily  cells  and do not  alter  the  inner 
atomic structure or life principle of the cells. In many cases no 
cure of disease is possible until the healing power of God has 
corrected, from within, the imbalance of "lifetrons" or intelli-
gent life energy in the body. The two basic causes of disease are 
underactivity and overactivity of the life energy, prana,  that 
structures and sustains the body. The improper functioning of 
any one (or more) of the five governing pranic currents—vyana, 
circulation,- udana,  metabolism; samana,  assimilation,- prana, 
crystallization; and apana, elimination—adversely affects bod-
ily health. When the natural harmonious balance of these sub-
tle energies is restored by God's divine power, the atomic bal-
ance of the physical cells they nourish is restored; the healing 
is perfect, and often instantaneous. So long as balanced vital-
ity is maintained by right living, proper diet, and pranayama 
meditation (life-energy control techniques), the body's own life 
energy "electrocutes" disease before it can develop. 
Balanced Development Is Essential 
Injury and disease are more often the cause of death than is 
old age. Most people die before true old age has set in. In some 
cases, and they are exceptional, all parts of the body grow weak 
at once; such persons die, without pain, like ripe fruit that falls 
in due time from the tree. But the majority are plucked from the 
tree of life before they are really ripe for death. 
In most cases of death, one bodily part had ceased func-
tioning before the rest. It may also happen that if one part is 
stronger or more developed than another, the resulting imbal-
ance of the life force in the body may cause suffering and even 
death. For example, someone with a weak heart in a strong-
muscled body may injure his heart by overuse of his muscular 
strength. Sandow,* "the strong man," died at fifty-eight when a 
blood vessel in his brain burst as a result of his having raised a 
* Eugene Sandow (1867-1925), advocate of physical culture and wrestling, 
noted for his physique and physical prowess. The famous athlete travelled 
widely to expound his ideas on physical fitness. 

HEALING BY GOD'S UNLIMITED  POWER  83 
car singlehanded. Overexercise that leads to unbalanced devel-
opment may thus have harmful consequences. 
The Self-Realization Fellowship [Yogoda Satsanga] Ener-
gization Exercises* place the least strain on the heart and pro-
vide for a uniform development of the body. Simple outdoor 
exercise, such as walking; balanced diet and moderation in 
eating; and quiet meditation are all conducive to health. 
Obey Nature's Laws and Have More Faith in God 
A master may ignore, without ill effect, dietary and other 
rules for health. The ordinary individual, however, should be 
careful to maintain physical well-being by right observance of 
the laws of nature. 
One's diet should be wisely chosen. The body requires for 
health certain amounts of starch, protein, and fat, but in excess 
they can be harmful. Very little starch is necessary,- bread is no 
longer held to be the "staff of life." Too much starch in the 
diet, especially from white flour, causes an over-accumulation 
of mucus in the body. (A certain amount of mucus is necessary, 
of course, to prevent the entry of harmful microbes into the 
mucous membranes.) Eat abundantly of foods that contain a 
high proportion of mineral salts, such as fruits and vegetables. 
This type of diet prevents constipation, which, when present, 
predisposes the body to many diseases. 
Nature tries by reflex action to remove causes of physical 
distress. When dust gets into the eye, we involuntarily try to 
wink the dust away. When dirt or dust enters the nose, we 
sneeze. If we eat something unwholesome, we get rid of it by 
regurgitation. When disease attacks any internal organ of the 
body, nature provides many means by which the organ may 
protect, defend, and renew itself. However, owing to various 
habits of living that alienate most men from nature, their in-
nate powers of recuperation and rejuvenation become impaired 
and are prematurely lost. 
Harmful  microbes  are ceaselessly  attacking  the body,-
good ones are ceaselessly defending it, aided sometimes by 
* These exercises, for energizing the body through conscious direction of 
prana by will power, were developed by Paramahansa Yogananda in  1916. 
They are taught in the Yogoda Satsanga Lessons. (Publisher's  Note) 

84  MAN'S ETERNAL QUEST 
diet, herbs, medicines, and other health measures. But an un-
limited source of protection for man lies in his strong thought 
that, as a child of God, he cannot be affected  by disease. 
Mind has much greater power than medicine. But to deny 
any power to medicine is unreasonable, because if drugs have 
no power, a man could take poison and not die. While one 
should  not  deny  the  potency  of medicines  and drugs,  one 
should understand that continuous dependence on them will 
prove their limitations; a time will come when they will lose 
their former efficacy in restoring the body to health. The only 
infinite power of healing lies in man's mind and soul. The body 
cannot be healed by spiritual means if the mental power and 
faith are weak. Permanent healing comes through the bound-
less power of the mind and through God's grace. 
Fruits, Vegetables, and Nuts Superior to Meat 
According to one school of thought, some diseases may be 
cured by eating the organs of animals. A savage devours the 
heart of a lion in the belief that his own heart will thus be 
invigorated. The tissues of chicken hearts are known to have 
a strengthening effect on the heart of man; and the liver helps 
those who  are anemic.  However,  many health  authorities 
state that iron- and vitamin-rich foods such as eggs,  cashew 
nuts, soybeans,  molasses,  dried apricots, dried lima  beans, 
dried peas, parsnips, spinach, and parsley may successfully be 
substituted for liver in overcoming anemia. Pepsin taken from 
animal organs is useful in cases of stomach ulcers,- but papain, 
a substance very similar to pepsin, is also present in the fruit 
of the papaya, which is a valuable healing aid to those who 
suffer from any form of impaired digestion. 
When man is sick he may feel justified in eating anything 
that has healing value, but animal flesh is not actually neces-
sary for this purpose; indeed, it may increase the bodily burden 
by contributing toxins to the bloodstream. Thus, while flesh 
foods may aid in healing one illness, they sometimes create a 
condition whereby another disease may develop elsewhere in 
the body. That is why the safest diet for man is fresh fruits, 
vegetables, finely ground nuts, and vegetable and diary pro-
teins. In certain cases the system may not tolerate raw fruits 

HEALING BY GOD'S UNLIMITED POWER  85 
and vegetables, but the average person will benefit by includ-
ing them daily in his diet. 
In vegetables and fruits God has infused medicinal power 
to help in overcoming disease. Even these, however, have but 
a limited potency. The organs of the body are essentially sus-
tained by the energy of God, and the person who employs var-
ious methods to increase this energy will have at his command 
a greater power for healing than is afforded by any medicine or 
diet. 
Purify the Body of Harmful Toxins 
Three-fourths of the body consists of water; hence the bod-
ily demand for water is much greater than that for food. (Death 
by thirst is a suffering more acute than death by starvation.) It 
is  important  to  give  the  body  plenty  of  water.  Drinking 
unsweetened fruit juices also is good. In localities where water 
has a calcium content high enough to dispose toward harden-
ing of the arteries in man, he should take, instead, fruit juices 
and watermelons, cantaloupes, and similar juicy fruits. Some 
health researchers say, however, that persons who have sinus 
trouble should not take citrus juices. 
Make it a point to drink plenty of liquids (and I do not 
mean soda-water beverages!) to wash away toxins in the body. 
But avoid drinking liquids with meals, as this can be injurious 
to digestion. One tends to wash down the food without chew-
ing it properly. If starches are not partially digested in the 
mouth, they often do not digest fully in the stomach. To chew 
food well is important—the stomach has no teeth. Hasty eat-
ing is harmful; particularly if large amounts of liquid are taken 
with the meal, thus diluting the gastric juices. Also, drinking 
liquids with meals gives a tendency to obesity. 
It is important to keep the bloodstream healthy. Beef and 
pork may release into the bloodstream toxic poisons and mi-
crobes. The white corpuscles try to destroy the microbes, but 
if the latter are strong and if the white corpuscles are insuffi-
cient to resist them, toxic reactions set in. For meat eaters, 
fish, chicken, and lamb are preferable to beef and pork, which 
are highly acid-producing. 
The most important principle in connection with eating is 

86  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
to avoid any form of overindulgence. As one learns to restrain 
himself he becomes healthier. It may often happen that one's 
desire for a certain food is so great that he thinks he cannot re-
sist it. His senses dictate to him, saying that he must eat that 
food, even when he knows it may be harmful to him. If he re-
fuses to perpetuate his bad habits, he will find that he comes 
to dislike what is injurious and to like what is  beneficial. 
Greedy people fill themselves and still they are looking for 
more food. By overeating, they dare to strain a heart-pump that 
has been overworked for perhaps forty years! 
Many persons  thoughtlessly  eat  late at night.  Usually 
sleep soon follows, during which man's internal  machinery 
slows down. The food may lie in the stomach without being 
properly digested. Eating shortly before the nightly rest  is 
therefore unwise. 
There is nothing worse for body and mind, however, than 
drinking intoxicating liquors. Under their influence a man may 
do things that in his right mind he would be ashamed to do. Vi-
olence, greed, lust for money and sex, even murder, may result 
from drunkenness. The belief that wine, sex experiences, and 
money will bring happiness is said by the sages to be the chief 
delusion that man must overcome in order to realize his true 
nature. 
Liquor increases man's desires for money and sex, and it is 
therefore the worst evil of the three. It is an unnecessary and 
extremely dangerous indulgence, because it stifles reason. A 
drunken man is no longer a true man. It is wisdom to strive to 
maintain only normal appetites. 
Increase Your Natural Resistance to Disease 
Fasting is a natural method of healing. When animals or 
savages are sick, they fast. The bodily machinery thus has an 
opportunity to cleanse itself and to obtain a much-needed rest. 
Most diseases can be cured by judicious fasting.* Unless one 
has a weak heart, regular short fasts have been recommended 
* In Armenia, Dr. Grant Sarkisyan has successfully used fasting to treat pa-
tients for a variety of disorders, including bronchial asthma, skin diseases, the 
initial state of arteriosclerosis, hypertension, stenocardia, and digestive tract 
diseases. A selective diet is to be followed after discharge from the hospital, 

HEALING BY GOD'S UNLIMITED  POWER  87 
by the yogis as an excellent health measure. Another good 
method of physical healing is through suitable herbs or herb 
extracts. 
In using medicines, one often finds that they are not pow-
erful enough to bring about a healing, or that they are so pow-
erful that they irritate the bodily tissues instead of healing 
them. Similarly, exposure to certain types of "healing rays" 
will burn the tissues. There are so many limitations in physi-
cal methods of healing! 
Better than medicines are the rays of the sun. In them is a 
wonderful healing power. One should take a ten-minute sun-
bath every day. Ten minutes a day is better than only occa-
sional exposure for longer periods*. A short sunbath daily, re-
inforced by good health habits, will keep the body supplied 
with sufficient life energy to destroy all harmful microbes. 
Healthy persons possess a natural resistance to disease, 
and particularly to infections. Illness comes when the resisting 
power of the blood has been diminished by wrong eating or by 
overeating, or when overindulgence in sex has depleted the 
vital energy. To conserve the physical creative energy is to 
supply all the cells with vibrant life energy,- the body then 
the perference being for vegetable and fruit dishes, which Dr. Sarkisyan feels 
are important for longevity. 
In the Soviet Union, Dr. Uri Nicholayev has given fasting therapy during 
the past twenty-three years. He states that sixty-four percent of his patients 
have been helped. Their illness is mental: schizophrenia. 
At George Air force Base, Victorville, California, twenty-five patients un-
derwent fasting treatment for up to eighty-four days for obesity. Sixteen com-
pleted the program, with weight losses of forty to one hundred pounds. Dr. 
Robert  M.  Karns,  who  conducted  the  experiment,  also  reported  that  a 
fortyeight-years-old diabetic patient, who was receiving twenty-five units of 
insulin daily before the fast, was able to discontinue the insulin treatment af-
ter the fast. A sixty-year-old patient reported improvement of an arthritic and 
heart condition. 
In experiments with mice, which are often the testing ground for treat-
ment of man's disorders, it was demonstrated that the life-span could be in-
creased by fifty percent. The treatment? Fasting. (Publisher's  Note) 
' It is wise to restrict sunbathing to the early and late hours of the day. Pre-
cautions should always be taken to protect sensitive skin against overexposure. 
H one has any questions regarding exposure to the sun, one should consult and 
follow the advice of one's doctor or a dermatologist. (Publisher's  Note) 

88  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
possesses a tremendous resistance to disease. Sexual overindul-
gence weakens the body and renders it vulnerable to illness. 
You Can Increase Your Life Span 
One naturally has a better chance to overcome sickness in 
youth than in old age. (There are always exceptions, however, 
owing to karmic conditions.) The average length of life today* 
is sixty years. Many doctors agree that it is easily possible to 
increase one's life span by careful living. 
Mahavatar Babaji and a number of other great  masters 
have lived for several hundred years. Life may be prolonged 
indefinitely—not by food, medicine, exercise, sunbathing, and 
other limited means, but by contact with the immeasurable 
power of God. We should think not only of the body but also 
of the Spirit. If we attain perfection in oneness with Spirit, we 
shall find perfection in body also.t 
Many persons are continually  busy looking after  their 
physical welfare but neglect the development of their minds. 
The key to all power lies in the mind. If one fails to cultivate 
that power, when serious disease comes he may die without 
making any resistance, regardless of his age. 
The Power of a Smile 
Conserve  the vital energy, follow a balanced diet,  and 
always smile and be happy. He who finds joy within himself 
discovers that his body is charged with electric current, life 
energy, not from food but from God. If you feel that you can't 
smile, stand before a mirror and with your fingers pull your 
mouth into a smile. It is that important! 
The healing methods I have touched on briefly in connec-
tion with food and the cleansing of the body by herbs or fast-
ing are limited in their effectiveness,- but when one is joyful 
within, he invites the help of the inexhaustible power of God. 
I  mean  a  sincere  joyfulness,  not  that  which  you  feign 
* I.e., in 1947, when this talk was given. 
t Great ones who have attained the perfection of oneness with Spirit may nev-
ertheless endure intense bodily suffering—not because of any failure on the 
part of Spirit, but because they choose, with divine permission, to work out on 
their own bodies some of the karmic effects of others' wrong actions, in order 
to help those persons. 

HEALING BY GOD'S UNLIMITED POWER  89 
outwardly but do not feel within. When your joy is sincere you 
are a smile-millionaire. A genuine smile distributes the cosmic 
current, prana,  to every body cell. The happy man is less sub-
ject to disease, for happiness actually attracts into the body a 
greater supply of the universal life energy. 
There are many things to talk about on this subject of 
healing. The main idea is that we should depend more on mind 
power, which is illimitable. The rules for guarding against dis-
ease should be: self-control, exercise, proper eating,  drinking 
plenty of fruit juices, occasional fasting, and smiling all the 
time—from within. Those smiles come from meditation. You 
will find then the eternal power of God. When you are in ec-
stasy with Him you consciously bring His healing presence 
into your body. 
Permanent Healing Comes from God 
Mind power carries with it the unfailing energy of God; 
that is the power you want in your body. And there is a way to 
bring in that power. The way is communion with God by med-
itation. When your communion with Him is perfect, the heal-
ing is permanent. When the causative power of God comes, the 
healing effect is instantaneous,- no time is required for cause to 
ripen into effect. 
Many people in distress try to evoke that power, but when 
they are not healed at once they lose faith in the Lord instead 
of continuing to try to enlist His aid. The man who clings to 
the Divine is bound to be healed; because God knows that the 
devotee is praying, and He cannot but respond. But when you 
give up, the Father says, "All right. I see that you can do with-
out Me. I shall wait for you." 
The Supreme Power may be invoked by continuous faith 
and unceasing prayer. You should eat rightly and do whatever 
else is necessary for the body, but continuously pray to Him: 
"Lord, Thou canst heal me because Thou dost control the life 
atoms and subtle conditions of the body that doctors  cannot 
reach with medicines." The external factors of medicines and 
fasting have a certain beneficial effect on the physical body, but 
they do not affect the inner force that sustains the cells. It is 
only when you go to God and receive His healing power that 

90  MAN'S ETERNAL QUEST 
the life energy is directed into the atoms of the bodily cells and 
produces instantaneous healing. Wouldn't you rather depend 
more or God? 
But the attempt to change one's dependence from physical 
to spiritual methods should be gradual. If a man accustomed to 
overeating  falls  sick  and,  with  the  intention  of  trying  to 
achieve a mental healing, abruptly starts fasting, he may be dis-
couraged if success is not forthcoming. It takes time to change 
one's way of thinking from dependence on food to dependence 
on mind. To be responsive to the healing power of God,  the 
mind must be trained to believe  in divine aid. 
Out of that Great Power all atomic energy is throbbing, 
manifesting and sustaining every cell of the physical universe. 
As moving pictures are sustained by a beam of light  coming 
from the projection booth of a movie house, so are all of us sus-
tained by the Cosmic Beam, the Divine Light pouring from the 
projection booth of Eternity. When you look to, and find that 
Beam,  you will  behold Its  unlimited  power  to rebuild  the 
atoms and electrons and lifetrons in all body cells that may be 
"out of order." Commune with the Great Healer! 

Eliminating the Static of Fear 
from the Mind Radio 
First Self-Realization Fellowship Temple at 
Encinitas, California, October 16, 1938 
Everything in the universe is composed of energy, or vi-
bration. The vibration of words is, by extension, a grosser ex-
pression of the vibration of thoughts. The thoughts of all men 
are vibrating in the ether. * Because thoughts have such a high 
vibratory rate, they have not yet been detected there; but it is 
fortunate that we do not know the thoughts of all men. 
Through the instrumentality of radio, you can push a but-
ton and lo, you hear music and voices! If it were not for the in-
telligence in the ether, through which the radio waves travel to 
your receiving set, you might hear all the different broadcasts 
at once. God created the ether, and He planned that man would 
create radio and radio-wave vibrations which could be trans-
mitted and received through this medium. Radio waves depend 
on the ether for transmission, and on electricity for amplifica-
tion in broadcasting and receiving. The sounds of radio broad-
casting are always present in the ether, but are inaudible to us 
without a radio instrument. The vibratory radio-waves repre-
sent thoughts that are being transmitted through space into 
any receiving set that is tuned in. 
When you are near and dear to someone, you can feel the 
thoughts of that person; but you are probabaly not able to do 
this with anyone as far away as India unless you have developed 
range. Those of you who practice regularly the Self-Realization 
' The hypothetical ether is not considered necessary to present scientific the-
ory on the nature of the material universe. But Hindu scriptures refer to ether 
as a fine vibratory "background" on which creation is superimposed. It fills all 
interstices of space, and is the vibratory force that separates all images, one 
from the other. (See ether  and elements  in glossary.) (Publisher's  Note) 
91 

92  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
Fellowship [Yogoda Satsanga Society] Lessons on concentration 
and meditation,  and are very calm,  will be able to feel  the 
thoughts of others, even from a distance. Your mind will be-
come more sensitive. 
We are all human radios: you receive the thought messages 
of others through your heart, * the centre of feeling, and broad-
cast your own thought messages through the spiritual eye, the 
centre  of  concentration  and  will.  Your  antenna  is  in  the 
medulla, the centre of intuitive superconsciousness.  Suppose 
you are away from home and you wish to perceive what is hap-
pening there. If your feelings are very calm and your  mind 
quiet, you will be able to intuit the feelings and thoughts of 
your family at home. When you become capable of great con-
centration, your feeling can penetrate everywhere; your per-
ception becomes charged with energy, with electricity. 
The World Is Only a Thought in the Mind of God 
There is in reality no spacet between India and here. But 
we are in America and we think we have to allow twenty-five 
days for a steamer trip before we can reach India. According to 
material consciousness time is required to traverse such a dis-
tance. But energy cuts down space. If we go by airplane, the trip 
takes but seven days.* The distance is decreased by the in-
creased energy of flight—the more energy, the more reduction 
of space or distance. Suppose you are sleeping and you dream 
that you are going to India. You take the train to New York, 
board the boat, stop at various ports of call, and arrive in Bom-
bay. All this can be done in minutes in the dream, because in 
thought there is no space. Or suppose I am dreaming that I am 
dialing a radio and I tune in India. There  is no space; it is all 
an idea in my brain. 
The whole world exists only in thought, such is the power 
* The occult seat, in man, of chitta, intuitive feeling. 
t Space and time are a part of the delusion of maya, which, to the perception 
of mortals, divides and measures the indivisible Infinite. In God's conscious-
ness, which is untouched by maya, and to the devotee united with God in di-
vine awakening, near and far, past, present, and future, all dissolve in the eter-
nal omnipresent Now. 
*  Seven days in 1938, and today a complete a earth orbit in a matter of min-
utes by a spaceship! Time and space already have been greatly bent to the will 
of man. "Tomorrow" he may conquer them. (Publisher's  Note) 

ELIMINATING THE STATIC OF FEAR FROM THE MIND RADIO  93 
of mind. Space is a mental concept. I can close my eyes and 
think of things that are two thousand miles away, and yet all 
those miles are a mere expansion of thought. Space and time 
are merely differentiations of thought. What is the difference 
between ice cream and hot coffee in a dream experience? When 
you awaken, you realize that in the dreamland ice cream was 
one thought and hot coffee another; they were merely  two 
different ideas. 
Thought has omniscient power. The kind of thought I am 
speaking  of is  the  thought  of God.  As He is  omnipresent 
through thought, so are we. Are we not already connecting the 
thought of America and the thought of India by radio? There is 
no space there. 
Often when you are trying to tune in a radio station, sta-
tic comes in and disturbs the program you are trying to hear. 
Likewise, when you are trying to accomplish some personal 
transformation  in your heart,  "static"  may interrupt  your 
progress. That static is your bad habits. 
Fear Cannot Enter a Quiet Heart 
Fear is another form of static that affects your mind-radio. 
Like good and bad habits, fear can be both constructive and 
destructive. For example, when a wife says, "My husband will 
be displeased if I go out this evening; therefore I won't go," she 
is motivated by loving fear, which is constructive. Loving fear 
and slavish fear are different. I am speaking of loving fear, 
which makes one cautious lest he hurt someone unnecessar-
ily. Slavish fear paralyses the will. Family members should en-
tertain only loving fear, and never be afraid to speak truth to 
one another. To perform dutiful actions or sacrifice your own 
wishes out of love for another person is much better than to do 
so out of fear. And when you refrain from breaking divine laws, 
it should be out of love for God, not from fear of punishment. 
Fear comes from the heart. If ever you feel overcome by 
dread of some illness or accident, you should inhale and exhale 
deeply slowly, and rhythmically several times, relaxing with 
each exhalation. This helps the circulation to become normal. 
If your heart is truly quiet you cannot feel fear at all. 
Anxieties  are  awakened  in  the  heart  through  the 

94  MAN'S ETERNAL QUEST 
consciousness of pain; hence fear is dependent on some prior 
experience—perhaps you once fell and broke your leg, and so 
you learned to dread a repetition of that experience. When you 
dwell on such an apprehension your will is paralysed, and your 
nerves also, and you may indeed fall again and break your leg. 
Furthermore, when your heart becomes paralysed by fear, your 
vitality is low and disease germs get a chance to invade your 
body. 
Be Cautious But Not Fearful 
There is hardly anyone who does not fear disease. Fear was 
given to man as a cautionary device to spare him pain; it is not 
meant to be cultivated and abused. Overindulgence in fear only 
cripples our efforts to ward off difficulties. Cautious fear is wise, 
as when, knowing the principles of right diet, you reason,  "I 
won't eat that cake, because it is not good for me." But unrea-
soning apprehension is a cause of disease,- it is the real germ of 
all sickness. Dread of disease precipitates disease. Through the 
very thought of sickness you bring it on yourself. If you are con-
stantly afraid of catching a cold, you will be more susceptible 
to it, no matter what you do to prevent it. Do not paralyse your 
will and nerves with fear. When anxiety persists in spite of your 
will, you are helping to create the very experience you are 
dreading. Also, it is unwise to associate more than is necessary 
and considerate with people who constantly discuss their own 
and others' ailments and infirmities,- this dwelling on the sub-
ject may sow seeds of apprehension in your mind. Those who 
are worried they are going to succumb to tuberculosis, cancer, 
heart trouble, should cast out this fear, lest it bring about the 
unwelcome condition. Those who are already sick and infirm 
need as pleasant an environment as possible, among people who 
have a strong and positive nature, to encourage them in positive 
thoughts and feelings. Thought has great power. Those who 
serve in hospitals seldom fall ill, because of their confident 
attitude. They are vitalized by their energy and strong thoughts. 
For this reason, as you get older, it is best not to tell others 
your age. As soon as you do, they see that age in you and asso-
ciate it with diminishing health and vitality. The thought of 
advancing age creates anxiety, and thus you devitalize yourself. 

ELIMINATING THE STATIC OF FEAR FROM THE MIND RADIO  95 
So keep your age private. Say to God: "I am immortal. I am 
blessed with the privilege of good health, and I thank Thee." 
Therefore be cautious, but not fearful. Take the precaution 
of going on a purifying diet now and then, so that any condi-
tions of illness that may be present in the body will be elimi-
nated. Do your best to remove the causes of illness and then be 
absolutely unafraid. There are so many germs everywhere that 
if you began to fear them you would not be able to enjoy life at 
all. Even with all your sanitary precautions, if you could look 
at your home through a microscope you would lose all desire 
to eat! 
Techniques of Tuning Out Fear 
Whatever it is that you fear, take your mind away from it 
and leave it to God. Have faith in Him. Much suffering is due 
simply to worry. Why suffer now when the malady has not yet 
come? Since most of our ills come through fear, if you give up 
fear you will be free at once. The healing will be instant. Every 
night, before you sleep, affirm: "The Heavenly Father is with 
me I am protected." Mentally surround yourself with Spirit 
;
and His cosmic energy and think: "Any germ that attacks me 
will be electrocuted." Chant "Aum" three times, or the word 
"God." This will shield you. You will feel His wonderful pro-
tection. Be fearless. It is the only way to be healthy. If you com-
mune with God His truth will flow to you. You will know that 
you are the imperishable soul. 
Whenever you feel afraid, put your hand over your heart, 
next to the skin; rub from left to right, and say, "Father, I am 
free. Tune out this fear from my heart-radio." Just as you tune 
out static on an ordinary radio, so if you continuously rub the 
heart from left to right, and continuously concentrate on the 
thought that you want to tune out fear from your heart, it will 
go; and the joy of God will be perceived. 
Fear Ceases with the Contact of God 
Fear is constantly haunting you. Cessation of fear comes 
with the contact of God, nothing else. Why wait?  Through 
Yoga you can have that communion with Him. India has some-
thing to give you that no other nation has ever given. I owe 

96  MAN'S ETERNAL QUEST 
everything to my guru, Swami Sri Yukteswar; he was a master 
in every way. It was by following his wisdom that I was able to 
succeed in my mission in the West. He said, "Whatever you do, 
try to do it as nobody else has done it before." If you remem-
ber that thought, you will succeed. Most people imitate others. 
You should be original, and whatever you do, do well. All na-
ture consciously communes with you when you are in tune 
with God. 
We often consider ourselves first, but we should always in-
clude others in our happiness. When we do that from the good-
ness of our hearts, we spread abroad a spirit of mutual consid-
eration. If everyone in a community of one thousand persons 
behaved this way,  each  one would have nine hundred  and 
ninety-nine friends. But if everyone in that community  be-
haved like an enemy to the other, each one would have nine 
hundred and ninety-nine enemies. 
Conquering the hearts of others by the power of love is the 
greatest victory you can win in life. Always try to consider oth-
ers first and you will find the whole world at your feet. That 
was the greatness of Jesus. He lived and died for all. Men of 
great material power who live only for themselves are soon for-
gotten, but those who live completely for others are remem-
bered forever. The King of Kings had no throne of gold during 
his brief span on earth; but he has reigned for twenty centuries 
on a throne of love in the hearts of millions of people. That is 
the best throne to have. 
A Single Thought May Lead to Redemption 
When you came into this world you cried, whereas every-
one else rejoiced. During your lifetime, work and serve in such 
a way that when it is time for you to leave this world, you will 
smile  at  parting  while  the  world  cries  for you.  Hold  this 
thought and you will always remember to consider others be-
fore yourself. 
This vast world was made that you might use your intel-
ligence to acquire knowledge of the Spirit, knowledge about 
your Self, fust one thought may redeem  you. You don't realize 
how effectively your thoughts work in the ether. 
How would you know human love if God Himself didn't 

ELIMINATING  THE STATIC OF FEAR FROM THE MIND RADIO  97 
give it to you by planting His love in the heart of each being? 
And since God is so kind and so loving then He should be the 
object of your search. He doesn't want to impose Himself on 
you. But the mysterious working of your body, the intelligence 
He has given you, and every other wonder in life should be 
sufficient stimulus to make you determine to find God. Every 
human being would be redeemed if he would try. You must try! 
When I started in this path, my life at first was chaotic; but 
as I kept on trying, things began to clear up for me in a mar-
vellous way. Everything that happened showed me that God is, 
and that He can be known in this life. When you find God, 
what assurance and fearlessness you will have! Then nothing 
else matters at all, nothing can ever make you afraid. Thus did 
Krishna exhort Arjuna to face fearlessly the battle of life and 
become spiritually victorious: "Surrender not to unmanliness; 
it is unbecoming of thee. O Scorcher of Foes, forsake this small 
weak-heartedness! Arise!" * 
* Bhagavad Gita 11:3. 

Nervousness—Cause  and Cure 
Ciica  1927 
Nervousness is a malady that can be overcome by a spe-
cific medicine: calmness. The disturbance of mental equilib-
rium, which results in nervous disorders, is caused by contin-
uous  states  of excitement  or excessive  stimulation  of  the 
senses. Indulgence in constant thoughts of fear, anger, melan-
choly, remorse, envy, sorrow, hatred, discontent, or worry,- and 
lack of the necessities for normal and happy living, such as 
right food, proper exercise, fresh air, sunshine, agreeable work 
and a purpose in life, all are causes of nervous disease. 
Any violent or persistent mental, emotional, or physical 
excitement greatly disturbs and unbalances the flow of life 
force throughout the sensory-motor mechanism and the lamps 
of the senses. If we connect a 120-volt bulb with a 2,000-volt 
source, it would burn out the bulb. Similarly, the nervous sys-
tem was not made to withstand the destructive force of intense 
emotion or persistent negative thoughts and feelings. 
Far-Reaching Effects of Nervousness 
Nervousness is no simple problem; it is a deadly enemy 
with far-reaching effects. Physically, it is difficult to heal any 
disease so long as it is aggravated by nervousness. Spiritually, 
an imbalance of life force in the body makes it extremely hard 
for the devotee to concentrate or meditate deeply enough to ac-
quire peace and wisdom. But nervousness can be cured. The 
sufferer must be willing to analyse his condition and remove 
the disintegrating emotions and negative thoughts that are lit-
tle by little destroying him. Objective analysis of one's prob-
lems, and maintaining calmness in all situations of life will 
heal the most persistent case of nervousness. 
98 

NERVOUSNESS—CAUSE  AND  CURE  99 
Realization that all power to think, speak, feel, and act 
comes from God, and that He is ever with us, inspiring and 
guiding  us,  brings  an  instant  freedom  from  nervousness. 
Flashes of divine joy will come with this realization;  some-
times a deep illumination will pervade one's being, banishing 
the very concept  of fear. Like an ocean,  the power of God 
sweeps in, surging through the heart in a cleansing flood, re-
moving all obstructions of delusive doubt, nervousness, and 
fear. The delusion of matter, the consciousness of being only a 
mortal body, is overcome by contacting the sweet serenity of 
Spirit, attainable by daily meditation. Then you know that the 
body is a little bubble of energy in His cosmic sea. 
The victim of nervousness must understand his case, and 
must reflect on those continual mistakes of thinking which are 
responsible for his maladjustment to life. When the nervous 
man once admits to himself that his disease is not mysterious 
in its cause, but the logical outcome of his own habits, he is al-
ready half cured. 
The Nervous System 
The nervous system is the telephonic outlet and inlet of 
the body, providing man with his response to outer and inner 
stimuli. Excitement upsets the nervous balance, sending too 
much energy to some parts and depriving others of their nor-
mal share. This lack of proper distribution of nerve force is the 
sole cause of nervousness. The calm man—he who avoids 
excitement because he is not overly attached to his ego and is 
aware that God, and not he, is running this universe—is al-
ways able to meet any situation in life because his nerve force 
is equilibrated. Lord Krishna said: "The knower of Spirit, abid-
ing in the Supreme Being, with unswerving  discrimination, 
free from delusion, is thus neither jubilant at pleasant experi-
ences nor downcast by unpleasant experiences."*  This is the 
goal we must strive for and attain. 
The nervous system supplies life current to the brain, 
heart, and other parts of the body. It distributes energy to the 
five senses of sight, hearing, touch, taste, and smell. Nerves 
are our medium  of contact  with  the  outer world and  the 
* Bhagavad Gita V:20. 

100  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
source of all our sensory reactions. How important it is, there-
fore,  to keep the nerves  in a state  of perfect  balance,  not 
shocking one part of the body with too much energy and con-
sequently limiting the supply to other regions. Not by rest-
lessness or emotional reactions, but by calmness, by deep 
trust in God, we reach the yogic state of an equilibrated being. 
The yogis have special techniques by which one can revive 
tissues burned out by nervousness, by sending life energy into 
nerves partially destroyed by mistreatment. Each cell and tis-
sue in the nervous system is a living, intelligent structure. Life 
energy can always renew it. 
Overcome Nervousness by Good Company 
Nervousness is of two kinds—psychological and mechan-
ical, or superficial and organic. The psychological or most com-
mon variety is due to mind excitement. This condition, long 
continued in, and accompanied by association with uninspir-
ing people and wrong diet and health habits, causes the chronic 
or organic manifestations of nervous diseases. 
The diet should be simple, balanced, and not too plentiful. 
Exercise should be regular. Too much sleep drugs the nerves, 
and too little sleep is hurtful to them. But all-important is the 
choice of company. Tell me what kind of friends a man has and 
I will tell you what he is. Flatterers do not help us. We should 
seek the society of superior men—those who tell us the truth 
and help us to improve ourselves. He is our best friend who 
humbly suggests how we may benefit our life by worthwhile 
changes. 
Strong criticism, delivered in a mean or heartless way, is 
like hitting a man on the head with a hammer. The power of 
love is infinitely more effective. Kind suggestions, given with 
love and understanding, can accomplish wonders,- mere fault-
finding accomplishes nothing. One is fit to judge others only 
after he has perfected his own nature. Till then, judging oneself 
is the only profitable analysis. 
Association with calm, wise people is one of the quickest 
ways to banish nervousness and realize our innate divinity. 
Nervous people should stay away from those suffering from 
similar troubles. 

NERVOUSNESS—CAUSE  AND  CURE  101 
Calmness Is the Best Cure 
The best cure for nervousness is the cultivation of calm-
ness. One who is naturally calm does not lose his sense of rea-
son, justice, or humour under any circumstances. He can al-
ways separate sentiment or wishful thinking from fact. He is 
not led astray by the honeyed tongues of dishonest men with 
improbable schemes for acquiring unearned wealth. He does 
not poison his bodily tissues with anger or fear, which ad-
versely affect circulation. It is a well-proven fact that the milk 
of an angry mother can have a harmful effect on her child. 
What more striking proof can we ask for, that violent emotions 
will finally reduce the body to an ignominious wreck? 
Poise is a beautiful quality. We should pattern our life by 
a triangular guide: calmness and sweetness are the two sides; 
the base is happiness. Every day, one should remind himself: "I 
am a prince of peace, sitting on the throne of poise, directing 
my kingdom of activity." Whether one acts quickly or slowly, 
in solitude or in the busy marts of men, his centre should be 
peaceful, poised. Christ is an example of that ideal. Everywhere, 
he demonstrated peace. He passed through every conceivable 
test without losing his poise. 
God is everywhere, controlling planets, galaxies; yet He is 
not disturbed. Though He is in this world, yet He is above this 
world. We must reflect His image and likeness. We must med-
itate often and hold on to the peaceful aftereffects. We must 
send out thoughts of love, goodwill, harmony. In the temple of 
meditation, with the light of intuition burning on the altar, 
there is no restlessness, no nervous striving or searching. Man 
is truly home at last, in a sanctuary not made with hands, but 
with God-peace. 

The Physical and Spiritual 
Rewards of Fasting 
Self-Realization Fellowship International Headquarters, 
Los Angeles, California, March 9, 1939 
The physical results and spiritual experiences of fasting are 
wonderful. The spirit within becomes disassociated from the 
demands of the body as the body itself is freed from  gross 
habits. I have just passed my thirtieth day of dieting and fast-
ing, and it seems as natural as if I had never eaten. All of you 
who are able should go on a three-day fast; if possible, a longer 
one.*  You would begin to discover that you can live without 
food. 
Pains or aches in the body indicate that something is go-
ing wrong with its machinery; repairs are needed. Think how 
conscientiously you keep your auto clean and in good repair. 
Much more complex than any car is the human body,- and the 
Lord wants you to keep it clean and in good running order, also, 
while at the same time depending more on Him. The secret of 
good health does not lie only in chemicals; one should rely 
even more on God's energy within. 
This life force within our bodies is, in fact, the source of 
life. It is a conscious power: the creator of the organs, and the 
supplier of their vitality as well. Ordinarily, life force is con-
tinually reinforced by mind power and food. But if it has been 
too much misused, it gives up and refuses to work anymore. Its 
power may grow dim in the eyes, for example, and then you 
cannot see well. No food gives strength, no change of air in-
vigorates, nothing can restore energy to the body when its life 
force begins to diminish. 
* Persons in good health should experience no difficulty in fasting for three 
days; longer fasts should be undertaken only under experienced supervision. 
Anyone suffering from a chronic ailment or an organic defect should fast only 
upon the advice of a physician experienced in fasting procedures. 
102 

THE PHYSICAL AND SPIRITUAL REWARDS OF  FASTING  103 
Fasting gives rest to the overworked organs, the bodily en-
gines; and also to the life force itself, relieving it of extra work. 
When you cease to make the life force feel it has to depend for 
its existence on external sources—food, water, oxygen, sun-
shine—it becomes self-supporting, independent. 
It is overeating for three hundered and sixty-five days of 
the year that creates many kinds of disease. Undeviating regu-
larity in eating, whether the system actually needs food or not, 
is also a curse to the body. The more you concentrate on the 
palate, the more disease you will have. To enjoy food is all 
right, but to be a slave to it is the bane of life. Why should you 
let nature hurt you? Nature cannot punish you if you are not 
attached to the body or bound by food. You must recognize that 
life force is the sustainer of the body. 
Without being fanatic, place the greatest emphasis on the 
mind, with the object of making its power more and more de-
pendable. If you insist on making your mind a slave to your 
body, the mind will take revenge. It will relinquish its power, 
so that you will have to depend on someone or something else 
to help you,- and no doctor or medicine can help any patient if 
the patient's mind has become so weakened that the disease 
has become chronic. Three-fourths of the cure lies in the mind. 
In India, we teach how to conquer the body so that one can 
rely to a greater degree on the mind. Those who  constantly 
look to physical means for health and healing will be depen-
dent  on  them  always.  But  mental  power  is  superior.  One 
should learn gradually to make greater use of the mind. By 
doing so, you will realize that the mind is a superb instrument. 
Whatever you command, it will do. This I have seen in my 
own life. 
One day when I was giving a lecture in Milwaukee, it was 
terribly hot; my face was streaming perspiration, but I could-
n't find my handkerchief. For a moment I didn't know what to 
do. Then I put my consciousness at the Christ [Kutastha] cen-
tre and inwardly said, "Lord, my body is cool." At once all per-
spiration disappeared, and my body felt cool as could be! So it 
is good to try to depend more on mind. However, you cannot 
deny the body entirely; if you truly did so, you wouldn't think 
or eat or move. 

104  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
Some are interested in the power of mind over body prin-
cipally to demonstrate health. But health is not the purpose of 
life. Communion with God is the purpose of life. You may feel 
well for a while, but a time comes when nothing avails. Then 
who will help you? God. Fasting is one of the great ways of 
approaching God: it releases the life force from enslavement to 
food, showing you that it is God who really sustains the life in 
your body. 
But the temptation of Satan is that as soon as the mind 
thinks "food," you want to eat. Once, as a little boy in India, I 
had a cold and I wanted to eat some tamarind, which is con-
sidered very bad for colds. My sister strongly disapproved, but 
because of my insistence she grudgingly brought me some of 
the fruit. I took one piece, chewed it, and spit it out. Without 
my swallowing the tamarind, the desire for its taste was satis-
fied. Since man all too often acquires the habit of greed, it is 
unfortunate for him that God didn't create the body in such a 
way that he could enjoy the sense of taste and let damaging 
excess or unhealthful food bypass the organs of digestion and 
assimilation! 
Self-Control—the Sanest Way to Health and Happiness 
But in truth the only way to health and happiness, and the 
sanest way, is self-control. To be master of yourself, so that you 
are not overpowered by your senses, is one of the greatest bless-
ings you can have. If you overload a wiring system with too 
much electricity, it burns out. And every time you load your 
digestive system with too much food, the life force burns out. 
When you refrain from overeating, and when you fast, the life 
force takes rest and becomes recharged. 
If your auto is not working properly,  you send it  to a 
garage. It runs better for a while, and then something else goes 
wrong and you send it back for further repairs. The same must 
be done for the body. The physical effects of fasting are re-
markable. A fast of three days on orange juice will repair the 
body temporarily, but a long fast will completely overhaul it. * 
Your body will feel as strong as steel. But if you want a per-
manent overhaul, then you must also watch at all times what, 
* See footnote on page 86. 

