270  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
he exorcised from many persons, in one case casting the evil 
spirits into the bodies of a herd of swine. * 
There is another world, the astral, hidden behind this uni-
verse. Its inhabitants are garbed in an astral form made of light. 
Lacking a physical body, they are "ghosts," invisible to us. 
Ordinarily they are confined to their own sphere, just as we are 
limited to our own physical world. If it were a simple matter 
for the ill-intentioned among astral beings to penetrate  the 
earth plane and hurt us, we would be living in terror all the 
time. There is enough horror already on this earth of ours. Are 
not millions of deadly germs floating around? Certainly God 
would not add the interference of spooks to our sufferings! 
There are, however, a few astral beings known as "tramp 
souls." They are earthbound because of strong attachments to 
the world, and are desirous of entering a physical form for 
sense enjoyments. Such beings are usually unseen; and they 
have no power to affect the ordinary person. Tramp souls do 
occasionally  succeed  in entering and taking possession  of 
someone's body and mind, but only when such a person is 
mentally unstable or has weakened his mind by keeping it of-
ten blank or unthinking. It is like leaving a car unlocked with 
the key in the ignition,- some vagrant may get in and drive off. 
Tramp souls want a free ride in someone else's physical-body 
vehicle—anyone's—having  lost their own that they were so 
attached  to. It was in  such  cases  of possession  that  Jesus 
exorcised the vagrant spirits. Tramp souls cannot stand the 
high vibration of spiritual thoughts and consciousness. Sincere 
seekers after God who practise scientific methods of prayer 
and meditation need never fear such beings. God is the Spirit 
of all spirits. No harm from negative spirits can come to one 
whose thoughts are on God. 
The Triune Nature of Man 
To understand better what astral beings are, let us first un-
derstand what we are. When God created us, we existed first 
only as consciousness. We were a creation of His mind. Is it not 
true that whenever you create something new, the initial step 
is to visualize a model of it in your mind? Then you gather 
* Luke  8:26-33. 

WHAT ARE GHOSTS f  271 
together the materials, and finally you construct the tangible 
image of your idea. In the same manner, we and everything in 
creation are triune: mental (the idea), astral (the building ma-
terial), and physical (the gross end-product). 
The physical body is made of 16 elements. How God com-
bined the chemical materials of physical elements to express 
intelligence is a marvel! Nevertheless, this body is anything 
but perfect. We can conceive of a much better one! I would like 
to create a body that would be like asbestos, able to go through 
fire and not burn,- one in which there could be no broken bones, 
no unpleasant  coughing.  The  physical body has pains  and 
aches: its "spark plugs" are often "missing"; first one part and 
then another gives out, and finally the heart fails. 
Americans like to get a new car every year, but they have 
to keep this old body-model sixty or seventy years! Yet even 
when it is falling apart, still you want to hang onto the model 
you have, until finally the Lord says, "Come on, get out of it!" 
Then you spring from the worn-out physical form and see that 
you are encased in a luminous body, an astral body of light and 
energy. * You rejoice to find that you can hear, you can see, you 
can touch; and that your new form possesses no bones to be 
broken, no flesh to be hurt. 
Our astral body is composed of 19 elements, which are 
mental, emotional, and lifetronic. These are intelligence; ego; 
feeling; mind (sense consciousness); five instruments of knowl-
edge (the subtle powers behind the physical sense organs of 
sight, hearing, smell, taste, and touch); five instruments of 
action  (the powers for the executive abilities  to  procreate, 
excrete, talk, walk, and exercise manual skill); and five instru-
ments of life force (those empowered to perform the crystal-
lizing, assimilating, eliminating, metabolising, and circulatory 
functions of the physical body). 
* There are many planes or spheres in the astral world, constituting the heaven 
or hell of life after death. "In my Father's house are many mansions" {John 
14:2, Bible). A person's good behaviour while on earth draws him to one of the 
higher spheres of light, peace, and joy. Evil deeds attract one to a lower, dark 
sphere where his experiences may be akin to hellish nightmares. One remains 
in the astral world for a karmically predetermined time, and then again takes 
rebirth on earth in physical form. 

272  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
These  are all  subtly  made.  We can  hear,  smell,  taste, 
touch, and see in the dream world through the power  that is 
in the five senses. And in the astral world, even without  the 
physical organs of the ears, eyes, nose, tongue, and skin, we 
still have with us the power of all five sense perceptions. The 
astral body is weightless and travels as light travels. You can 
at will make the astral body very small like an atom or you 
can make it very large. Why not? God, the divine operator of 
the cosmic movie of creation, can enlarge or reduce the size of 
the picture on the screen. He is the projectionist, running the 
film from the booth of eternity. You are an individualized ex-
pression of His infinite light. Your astral body is  therefore 
much freer from the cosmic limitations that so strongly bind 
the physical form. 
But God had first to think of what materials He wanted 
to put into the physical and astral bodies before He actually 
created them. We therefore have also a causal or idea body of 
35 elements: the 16 ideas that go to make up the elements of 
the  physical  body,  and  the  19  ideas  that  constitute  the 
elements of the astral body. From the causal  thought-forms 
the astral body's five instruments of life force make visible the 
astral body of light and the physical body of gross matter. The 
following experiment illustrates the idea. Close your eyes and 
visualize a horse on the left. At first your concept is fuzzy, but 
if I suggest a white  horse, you can more easily visualize  it. 
Now think of a black horse on the right side. You are creating 
mental or causal images. Switch them about so that the white 
horse is on the right side. If you can visualize a little  more 
strongly, you will be able to see these thought-forms as real 
images. That is what you do in a dream: your mind is more 
concentrated  then, causing your thought-forms  to  become 
visible to you. Dreams and visions are astral in essence, being 
composed of light and energy. Could you actually make  the 
astral images of the black and white horses true to the physi-
cal senses, you would have materialized a physical creation. 
So essentially we are made of 35 ideas, which make up the 
ideational  or  causal  body  of  man.  Encased  within  the  35 
thoughts is the spirit of God, which is called the soul. Just as 
one flame emerges from the tiny openings of a gas burner as 

WHAT ARE GHOSTS f  273 
many individual flames, so are we all one light, flowing from 
God into many bodies. 
At Death We are Still Encased in the 
Astral and Causal Bodies 
When you die, your physical body of 16 elements disinte-
grates, but the 19 elements of your astral body remain intact. 
Where, then, are all those souls who have left this earth? They 
are roaming in the ether. "That is impossible," you say. So let 
us make a comparison. If a primitive tribesman came here and 
I told him that music is audible in the ether, he would laugh at 
me, or perhaps become frightened; but if I then brought a radio 
and tuned in a station where music was playing, he would no 
longer be able to deny the truth of my statement. I could sim-
ilarly show you right now that astral beings are roaming in the 
ether, and you couldn't deny it. The astral world is right here, 
just behind the gross vibration of the physical cosmos. 
If you were to behold the multitude of astral beings in the 
ether around you at this moment, many of you would be afraid; 
and some of you would try to seek among them your departed 
loved ones. If you concentrate deeply at the spiritual eye you 
can view with inner vision that luminous world in which are 
living all the souls who have gone on to the astral plane. In 
human beings the heart acts as a receiving instrument and the 
spiritual eye as a broadcasting station. Even if you cannot see 
your lost beloved ones, if you can calmly concentrate your feel-
ing on the heart, you can become aware of the reassuring pres-
ence of those dear to you who are now in astral form, enjoying 
their freedom from flesh thralldom. 
I see many astral beings who have left the material plane, 
but they cannot see me. I don't make myself visible to them, 
but I can behold them if I so desire. * 
Therefore, we are not fully released at death when we 
depart from the physical form. Our souls are still encased in 
* Great masters watch over their disciples on the astral and causal planes as 
well as on earth. Such masters can and do materialize in physical or astral form 
in response to the soul call of a true devotee; but at their own wise discretion. 
We find an example in Lahiri Mahasaya's summoning Mahavatar Babaji to ap-
pear before doubting friends, described in Autobiography  of a Yogi, chapter 34. 

274  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
the subtle astral and ideational bodies. It is only when  man 
dons a physical form that he becomes a visible being in this 
world. After the death of his physical body, he remains in the 
astral form as a "ghost": an intelligent, invisible being, with 
essentially the same mentality and characteristics he had on 
earth. Inhabitants of the astral realms can of course see one 
another in their luminous bodies. But astral beings are not or-
dinarily visible to us on earth unless we know how to perceive 
the astral world through the spiritual eye. When souls shed the 
astral body and go into a mental form in the causal world* they 
are not nonentities, but they do become truly invisible, even 
as ideas are invisible. 
Jesus said, "Destroy this [body] temple and in three days I 
will raise it up."+ He meant that he had to divest himself of 
the physical, astral, and mental bodies (by casting out all ves-
tiges of attachment to a form) to become one with Spirit. It 
took three distinct efforts to do this. 
If a departed soul has unfinished desires created while on 
the earth plane, it continues to feel in the astral those desires 
and the wish to express itself through a material body. And so 
that  soul in its astral vehicle is drawn again into a united 
sperm and ovum cell and is once more in a physical form. 
The Intelligence in Prana Creates the Physical Body 
The prana  that permeates the physical body is intelligent 
life force ("lifetrons"). The electricity that illuminates the light 
bulb does not create the bulb; but the electricity or life force in 
the united human sperm and ovum cells guides the embryonic 
and subsequent development of the entire human body. Mani-
festing as the aforementioned five life forces of the astral body, 
it is an intelligent or consciously directed force. 
It is unwise to ascribe to yourself permanently any defect 
of your body. Suppose you have lost an arm in this life, and the 
thought of that loss becomes so impinged on your conscious-
* When souls are free from physical desires, they need no longer reincarnate 
on earth. Such souls then migrate between the astral world and the causal 
"heaven," reincarnating in the astral until spiritual freedom is attained from 
that state also. When all causal desires are overcome, one becomes a liberated 
or free soul, 
t John 2:19. 

