LOOKING AT CREATION  WITH SEEING EYES  255 
one's true Self. How complex is man! each one in himself a 
full-length novel. 
The Infinite Potential of Thought 
Man is supposed to get something out of this life besides 
eating, sleeping, and working. The thinkers begin to wonder 
about life. They observe and question why things happen, or do 
not happen, in a certain way. We have a first and then a second 
set of teeth; why not a third? What causes this regulation? Be-
cause of man's unquestioning acceptance of many delusive 
thoughts of physical limitation, he allows them to control his 
present sphere of existence. Thinkers do not accept the in-
evitable,- they turn their efforts toward changing it. This is the 
ingredient that makes progress possible. 
I am thrilled when I see the great manufacturing centres, 
the  remarkable  inventions,  and other  exceptional  human 
accomplishments. How much has come from the brain of man! 
And the brain itself is infinitely more intricate than anything 
it has produced. 
There is a story about a certain king who showed such 
affectionate regard for his prime minister that others in the 
court, noticing the monarch's obvious preference, were jealous. 
Realizing this, the king wanted to show them why the minister 
was his favourite. Some music sounded in the distance, and the 
king turned to one of his courtiers, saying, "Please find out 
what is going on." After some time the man returned with the 
information that it was a marriage procession. "Who is going to 
be married?" inquired the king. The courtier didn't know, so 
another courtier was sent out. The man returned with a reply 
to the king's latest query, but when the sovereign asked another 
question he could not answer. The result was the same with 
courtier after courtier. Finally the king called for the prime min-
ister and asked him to go and find out what was taking place. 
When the minister returned, the king plied him with questions, 
every one of which the alert and thorough prime minister was 
able to answer satisfactorily. 
A great many persons are dull-minded like the uninformed 
courtiers. They are not necessarily stupid; just too mentally 
lazy to make any effort beyond obvious necessity. I can condone 

256  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
physical laziness (there might be a justifiable  physiological 
cause); but there is no excuse for mental laziness! The mentally 
idle do not like to think, because even that seems too much 
work for them. 
Thought is fascinating. No one will ever be able to tabu-
late all the tendencies and perceptions of the mind; its capac-
ity is infinite. Yet the mind cannot think an original thought: 
there is not a single idea that God has not originated already in 
conceiving His past, present, and future creations. Therefore if 
you think deeply enough about a subject, the answer to any 
question about it will come. 
You must feel as well as think; if you do not have feeling 
along with your thoughts, you will not always be successful in 
reaching the right conclusion. Feeling is an expression of intu-
ition, the repository of all knowledge. Feeling and thought, or 
reason, must be balanced; only then does the divine image of 
God within you, the soul, manifest its full nature. Hence Yoga 
teaches one how to balance his powers of reason and feeling. 
One who does not have both equally is not a fully developed 
person. 
In God-Consciousness Everything Becomes Beautiful 
In my younger days I used to go sight-seeing, but my in-
terest was only in temples. As my consciousness changed with 
the practice of meditation, I began to look at the world differ-
ently; everything seemed transformed and interesting to me. 
Now I see behind all creation the kingdom of my Father. It is 
enchanting beyond any dreams of this world! And sometimes 
I see the beauties of His kingdom showing through the gross 
physical creation. 
As you progress spiritually and draw closer to God, He 
reveals to you more and more wonders of creation. Even in the 
dead and ugly-looking stalks of a wheat field after the harvest 
you will see life. It played its part there, and to the ordinary 
eye it is gone; but with the divine eye* you will see, even in 
the outer desolation, the beautiful colours of dancing electrons 
and protons. 
Behind  every  material  object  is  as  astral  blueprint  of 
* The spiritual or third eye in man; the eye of intuitive perception. 

LOOKING  AT CREATION  WITH SEEING  EYES  257 
coloured light. In the astral world everything is motion, every-
thing is living; there is nothing called "dead." Even in the phys-
ical world death is not cessation of life, only a change into a 
different form. Life is still throbbing in the "lifeless" object. In 
the bones of dead animals I have beheld rich colours and vi-
brating light. 
You see only the gross material products coming from 
God's hidden factory behind creation; but if you went into the 
factory itself, you would behold in what marvellous manner 
everything in this world has been brought into manifestation. 
The factory behind creation is beyond imagination,-  the 
whole universe is a single thought in the mind of God! So sim-
ple, yet the galaxies are guided by mathematics inconceivable 
by man. Everything runs in perfect order. What tremendous in-
telligence is manifested in creation! The Infinite is working in 
everything. All the different eddies of motion called life are 
controlled by that Cosmic Intelligence. 
Every hundred years a billion and a half persons leave this 
earth, and more than that many are born. What complexities 
of supply and demand are created thereby! Even  so, the Divine 
Intelligence has given ample food to take care of human needs. 
Man alone is responsible for lack and misery on earth. By this 
time we could have had a millennium—everyone healthy and 
supplied with all of life's necessities, living in a happy and 
peaceful way in a wisely governed existence. But man's self-
ishness, and power in the hands of the inept, destroy such a 
possibility. Abraham Lincoln expressed the highest ideal of 
government when he said it should be "of the people, by the 
people, and for the people." He was a deeply spiritual man. 
Even so, he. had to suffer because of the ignorance of a few. 
This World Is a Temporal Place 
It is natural to wonder where exceptional men such as 
Lincoln, and departed dear ones, once so tangible! have gone 
after death. Such questions arise in the mind, not to discour-
age you, but to awaken in you a realization of the temporal 
dream-nature  of life.  The  Bhagavad  Gita*  tells  us:  "That 
which is night (of slumber) to all creatures is (luminous) wake-
* 11:69. 

258  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
fulness to the man of self-mastery  The seeming state of 
wakefulness of the ordinary man is perceived by a sage to be, 
in reality, a state of delusive sleep." 
Thus most people are sleeping soundly throughout  this 
dream-life; only the man of realization is awake. He is not 
interested in the activities that engross the ordinary man who 
busies himself seeking wealth and sense pleasures, and wast-
ing time in shallow social engagements. Man makes a nervous 
wreck of himself pursuing the fleeting attractions of this world, 
whereas the joy and wonder of God, which is beyond descrip-
tion, would give him so much more: happiness and fulfillment 
unending! 
Only a little while you live as an individualized image in 
God's dream-world. You are dreaming your mortal existence; it 
is part of God's cosmic dream. Every day you are living in this 
dream of physical being. Every night, in deep sleep, it is gone. 
And one day, when you awaken in God—who  is your real 
Self—the dream will be gone forever. 
Seek the Lord Who Is Hiding Behind Creation 
Use your time rightly, to discover the factory of the Divine 
behind this world. Once for an entire day I beheld in vision the 
infinite wonders of creation, and I prayed: 
"O Father, when I was blind I found not a door that led to 
Thee. Thou hast healed my eyes; now I discover doors every-
where: the hearts of flowers, the voices of friendship, memo-
ries of lovely experiences. Each gust of my prayer opens a new 
entrance to the vast temple of Thy presence."* 
Be adamant, strong, and unflinching in your determination 
to discover the One who is hiding behind this creation. Snatch 
yourself away from the demands of the world, and do not go to 
bed at night until you have consciously communed with God. 
I seldom retire before four o'clock in the morning; only during 
the night can I find freedom from my responsibilities and be 
wholly with God. 
The ordinary man with his everyday responsibilities can 
be just as busy as the president of the United States. Busy, busy, 
busy! that is life's demand. You have to reserve time each day 
* "Doors Everywhere," in Whispers from  Eternity. 

LOOKING  AT CREATION  WITH SEEING  EYES  259 
to get away from the world and be with God. Control your life, 
and set aside time to practise meditation for communion with 
Him. Then everything in this world will be a wonder to you. 
As scientists made their discoveries by following certain 
disciplines and physical laws, so will you find God without fail 
when you scientifically follow spiritual laws. You are helping 
yourself in the highest way when you study and apply these 
laws as set forth in the Self-Realization  Fellowship  [Yogoda 
Satsanga] teachings. 
Forget not the things I have told you. "A word to the wise— 
those who are spiritually awakened—is sufficient." Yet Jesus 
said: "The harvest truly is plenteous, but the labourers  are 
few."*  If you receive these teachings and practise them, you 
will realize every truth I have told you. It is not complicated; I 
have given only those spiritual techniques that will enable you 
to perceive and commune with God. No matter how unpleas-
ant your circumstances in this world, when you discover God 
you will see Him working through you and manifesting  in 
everything, and you will be filled with His love and joy. 
India's rishis remind us that health and prosperity, mate-
rial accomplishments  and possessions, are not lasting.  Why 
concentrate only on goals that are perishable? What is lasting 
is the ever-new joyous contact of God and the attainment of 
Self-realization—finding  out who you are, knowing that  the 
image of God is within you. When you have that realization, 
you will be a satisfied person. The scriptures of India describe 
one who attains this state as a siddha,  "successful one." When 
I was teaching congregations of hundreds and thousands I was 
often called "successful." That did not impress me. One may 
be recognized by the whole world and yet be unknown to the 
only One whose attention matters; and he who attracts  the 
notice of God may be entirely unknown to the world. Which 
would you prefer? I wanted only the recognition of my Father. 
The acclaim of the world can be so intoxicating that man forgets 
to cultivate the all-fulfilling approbation of the Lord. 
It is natural for man to yearn for the role of king on this 
earthly stage, but if all were kings, there could be no play. Your 
part is just as important as anyone else's. The point is that you 
* Matthew  9:37 (Bible). 

260  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
must play your role according to the Divine Director's wish; 
when you live your part to please God, you will be successful. 
This should be the constant prayer in every human heart: 
"My Lord, work Thou through my hands; they were made 
to serve Thee and to pick flowers for Thy temple. Mine eyes 
were made to behold Thy presence in the flickering stars, in 
the eyes of soulful devotees,- my feet were made to take me to 
Thy temples everywhere to sip the nectar of Thy sermons to 
seeking souls; my voice was made only to speak of Thee. I 
taste wholesome food that I may be reminded of Thine all-
nourishing goodness,- I inhale the perfume of flowers that I 
may  breathe  Thy  fragrant  presence  there.  I  dedicate  my 
thoughts,  feelings,  and love to Thee. All my senses are in 
harmony with Thy celestial orchestra of fragrance, beauty, and 
joy  playing  their  refrain  in  the  eternal  symphony  of  the 
cosmos. 
"Lead me from darkness to light. Lead me from hatred to 
love. Lead me from limitations to Thine inexhaustible power,-
lead me from ignorance to wisdom. Lead me from suffering and 
death to everlasting life and enjoyment in Thee. Above all, lead 
me from the delusion of human attachment into realization of 
Thy love eternal, which plays hide-and-seek with me in all 
forms of human love. 
"Father, Mother, Friend, Beloved God, reveal Thyself unto 
me! Leave me in ignorance no longer. All delusion I cast from 
the sacred shrine of my soul. Be Thou the only King sitting on 
the throne of my ambitions, the only Queen in the castle of my 
love, the only Deity in the temple of my soul. Keep me awake 
in Thy consciousness, that I may pray and demand unceasingly 
until Thou dost open all doors into Thy home of wisdom, and 
there receive me, Thy prodigal child, and entertain me with the 
fatted calf of immortality and eternal joy." 

The Invisible Man 
First Self-Realization Fellowship Temple at 
Encinitas, California, Maich 3, 1940 
It seems preposterous to think of man as invisible. We are 
visible to ourselves every day as a physical body. But there are 
many ways in which we manifest our essential invisibility. For 
example, close your eyes. Your form is invisible to you; how do 
you know you exist? You are aware of the body's weight; you 
can hear, smell, taste, and touch. Nevertheless you are real to 
yourself only in terms of ideas. You are an invisible  nucleus 
around which many thoughts are revolving. Now open your 
eyes. Are you the form that you see, or that inner being you 
were just now conscious of with eyes closed? 
The visible man is of little importance; the invisible self, 
or  soul,  is  of  utmost  importance.  During  sleep  you  are 
unaware of the visible man; but you are aware of yourself, for 
when  you  wake  up  you  know  whether  you  slept  well  or 
poorly. Therefore your invisible self is real. Take that  away 
and your outer visibility is meaningless. Without the invisible 
self the body would be as worthless as a corpse. The invisible 
man within is the real one. But strange to say, man doesn't try 
to analyse what that invisible self is. He is so interested in the 
form  he  can  see,  thinking  constantly  about  his  physical 
appearance and well-being he doesn't stop to reason out that 
the inner unseen self is the reality. 
Within the physical body, yet invisible to physical eyes, is 
an identical body of light, the astral encasement of the soul. If 
one of your fingers has been cut off, you still feel as if that finger 
were there. Anyone who has lost a limb knows this sensation. 
There is an invisible astral counterpart for all the bodily parts. 
Behind your physical heart is an invisible heart. Without  it, 
your visible heart would not beat. You have invisible organs of 
261 

262  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
sight  and hearing,  an  invisible  brain,  invisible  bones  and 
nerves. These parts—tissues of light and energy—constitute 
the astral body of the invisible man. The astral body looks 
exactly like the visible one, except that its form, being made of 
light and energy, is exceedingly subtle. 
If you are physically afflicted you should not say,  "My 
sight is gone," or "I have lost a hand." Your invisible eyes and 
hands are still present. Though  your physical  arm may be 
paralysed, your invisible arm is not disabled. Never believe 
that the invisible organs are in any way affected by disease of 
the physical organs, because your negative thought  would 
impede the flow of intelligent life energy into the physical body 
parts. 
Electrical currents are passed through a wire. Which is 
more important, the wire or the electricity? The wire exists 
merely for the passage of the electricity,- the electricity does not 
exist for the wire. So the body exists for the use of the invisible 
man, the soul, not he for the body. However, the physical body 
must be in a certain condition for the invisible self to remain 
there. 
What a pity that this invisible self is tied to the body! If it 
were not, we could go walking on the water and fly in the sky 
and come back into the physical body again. The astral body of 
the invisible self has sensory perceptions much greater than 
those of its physical counterpart. Man has invented machines 
that in some ways are better than the physical body, which has 
many limitations. But when your consciousness of the invisi-
ble astral body is developed, you will realize that it can hear 
what the physical ears cannot hear, and see what the physical 
eyes cannot see. It can also smell, taste, and touch objects far 
beyond the range of the physical senses. And you can make it 
large or small at will, just as pictures on a movie screen can be 
made large or small by the man in the projection booth. 
Investigate the Electricity That Lights the Body Bulb 
You are always looking after the physical body-bulb. Have 
you never thought how wonderful it would be to investigate 
the electricity that lights the bulb? Visible man is composed 
basically of sixteen elements, chemicals that can be purchased 

THE INVISIBLE  MAN  263 
in a store. Your body is worth only about ninety cents;  in 
depression times even less! Why not cultivate a better ac-
quaintance with the invisible man? It is he who has power and 
friends and love. Without him, visible man has nothing but the 
chemicals of which he is made. 
Turn the spotlight of your attention inward, away from the 
limited visible man. The physical body has backaches  and 
stomachaches,- it suffers deterioration in old age; it is the nas-
tiest little animal! always crying and whining for something. 
The visible man cannot bear a bad fall, and he  sometimes 
shrinks at even a pinprick; the invisible man is unhurt by any-
thing. He is free. He can banish all the troubles of the physical 
body. The invisible man within you is what you are. "The One 
who pervades all things is imperishable. Nothing has power to 
destroy this Unchangeable Spirit."* 
You think you are the body, but you are not. A piece of ice 
can be melted into liquid and then made to disappear by evap-
oration. The process can be reversed, condensing the vapour 
into liquid and freezing the liquid into solid form as ice once 
again. The ordinary man has not yet learned to perform simi-
lar transformations with his bodily atoms, but Christ showed 
that it could be done. 
Man's Body Is Composed of 35 Thoughts of God 
The human body of 16 material elements is nothing more 
than a shadow of the invisible man, who has two bodies—an 
astral form made of electrical currents, and a causal form made 
of ideas. Your astral form of light consists of 19 elements and 
your invisible causal form is made of 35 thoughts—the 19 ideas 
that produced the 19 electrical elements of your astral body, t 
and the 16 ideas that produced the 16 gross material elements 
of your physical body. God first created the iron and potassium 
and other chemical elements in idea; then He  materialized 
them to make your physical body. The real you is invisible, 
because even your physical body, as well as everything else in 
creation, was first conceived in thought. 
So your body is essentially a causal form of 35  thoughts 
* Bhagavad Gita 11:17. 
t See astral body in glossary. 

264  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
within an astral body of 19 elements of light and energy, which 
in turn is encased in a physical body of 16 chemical elements. 
When you die, the visible physical body will vanish, but the 
astral body of the invisible self within will be real to you; you 
will be aware of your astral form. By higher spiritual advance-
ment you will see that your subtle astral body can be reduced 
to 35 thoughts, and that your consciousness behind those 35 
thoughts is the Reality; for your consciousness, or soul, is a 
spark of the cosmic consciousness of God. 
When you are viewing a motion picture you see many fig-
ures on the screen, but if you look up you see only one beam 
of light projecting those images. Similarly, from the brain flow 
five currents  of energy,  the vibratory creative  elements  of 
earth, water, fire, air, and ether, which condense to materialize 
this physical body on the screen of creation. * 
Motion pictures used to be silent; now there is sound, and 
they are experimenting with odours, so that when you see a 
garden on the screen you will also smell the fragrance of the 
flowers. When those light-produced forms can be made true to 
touch and taste also, you will have produced the fivefold aspects 
of God's creation. The five senses by which man apprehends 
creation have their correspondences in the five elemental elec-
tricities—ether (sound), air (touch), fire (sight), water (taste), and 
earth (smell)—from which creation was materialized. Someday 
the whole world will appear to you as a kind of motion pic-
ture—forms of light that are true to the five sensory percep-
tions. The terrible things that are happening in the world now 
are distressingly real; but when you are able to behold them as 
creations of light and shadow, you will understand that they are 
only a show, a part of God's play. 
* The cosmic vibration, or Aum, structures all physical creation, including the 
human body, though the manifestation of five tattwas  (elements):  earth, 
water, fire, air, and ether. These are intelligent vibratory forces. Without the 
earth element there would be no state of solid matter; without the water ele-
ment, no liquid state; without the air element, no gaseous state,- without the 
fire element, no heat; without the ether element, no background on which to 
produce the cosmic motion picture show. The creative cosmic vibration enters 
the body of man through the medulla,  and is then divided into the five 
elemental currents by the action of the five lower charkas,  or centres: the 
coccygeal (earth), sacral (water), lumbar (fire), dorsal (air), and cervical (ether). 

THE INVISIBLE  MAN  265 
You are only dreaming that you have a body of flesh. Your 
real self is light and consciousness. You are not the physical 
body. The visibility of the body deludes our material  con-
sciousness. If you cultivate  superconsciousness—awareness 
of your real self, the soul—you will realize that the body is 
simply a projection of that invisible self within. Then you can 
do anything with the body. But don't try just yet to walk on 
water! 
In the motion-picture house you are engrossed in the im-
ages on the screen. They look so real! You are not conscious 
of the light overhead by which the images are being projected. 
But if you look up you can see that the visible is proceeding 
out of the invisible; the forms on the screen are all proceeding 
out of that one light from the projection booth. What is the 
difference between the light and the pictures? If there were no 
light,  could pictures  have been materialized?  Similarly,  if 
there were no invisible man, there would be no visible man. 
When the invisible man leaves the physical form, the body 
disintegrates. Those who understand the subtle  relationship 
between the visible and the invisible man can dematerialize 
and materialize the physical body at will. * We are coming to 
that evolutionary period during which we will realize increas-
ingly that we are really invisible beings, or souls. 
The Invisible Man Is Free from Suffering and Death 
To live only in the consciousness of this visible body of 
flesh is spiritually retarding, for the body is subject to the suf-
ferings  of disease,  injury,  poverty,  hunger,  and death.  We 
should not desire to think of ourselves as this visible, vul-
nerable, destructible body. The invisible man within us can-
not be hurt or killed. Should we not strive more to realize our 
* Great masters who have attained God-realization are able to arrange the 
atoms at will to create any form they wish. Paramahansa Yogananda related in 
his autobiography that his beloved guru, Swami Sri Yukteswar,  appeared 
before him in the flesh three months after his death. Not only was it a visible 
form; Paramahansaji mentions embracing his guru "with an octopus grip," and 
detecting "the same faint, fragrant, natural odour which had been characteris-
tic of his body before." Further, guru and disciple talked with each other at 
length, as described in Autobiography  of a Yogi, chapter 43, "The Resurrection 
of Sri Yukteswar." (Publisher's  Note) 

266  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
unknown immortal nature? By increasing our knowledge of 
this invisible self we will be able to control the man visible, 
as great masters do. Even when the visible man is in distress, 
he who is aware of his divine powers as the invisible  man 
within can remain detached form physical suffering. 
How will you gain such control? First you must learn to 
live more in silence,- you must learn to meditate. It may seem 
uninteresting at first; you have kept so closely in touch with 
this visible body that you have difficulty in thinking about 
anything except its ceaseless troubles, desires, and demands. 
But make the effort. Keeping your eyes closed, repeat again and 
again,  "I am made in the image of God. My life cannot  be 
destroyed by any means. I am the invisible man everlasting." 
Everything Is the Result of an Idea 
That invisible man is made in the image of God, free as 
the Spirit is free. In the visible man lie all the troubles and 
limitations of the world. Whenever we are conscious of our 
bodies we are tied to the body's limitations. Hence the great 
masters teach us to close our eyes and remind ourselves, by 
meditation on the invisible self, that we are not restricted to 
what our physical bodies can do. I used to affirm with deep 
conviction: "I am not limited by my physical body. Wherever 
I want to go, I am instantly there." You may say, "That is only 
a thought." Well, what is thought? Everything you see is the 
result of an idea. You could not visualize anything without 
thought. Invisible thought gives all things their reality. There-
fore if you can control your thought processes, you can make 
anything visible; you can materialize it by the power of your 
concentration. 
Suppose you are sitting in silence and I ask you to con-
centrate on this temple in which we are gathered. Again and 
again you try, until your mind has gone very deep,- then you 
will see the temple just as it appears now to your physical 
eyes. Invisible thoughts can be materialized into visual expe-
riences. 
If you close your eyes, you cannot see your body, yet it is 
real to you. Why think that the invisible self is unreal, just 
because you cannot see it? In meditation you peer into the 

THE INVISIBLE  MAN  267 
darkness behind closed eyes and centre your attention on the 
soul, the invisible self within you. Learning to control your 
thoughts and interiorize your mind, by scientific guru-given 
techniques of meditation, you will gradually develop spiritu-
ally: your meditations will deepen and your invisible self, the 
soul-image of God within, will become real to you. In this 
joyous awakening of Self-realization,  the limited body con-
sciousness that was so real becomes unreal; and you know 
that you have found your true invincible self and its oneness 
with God. 
Realize Your Immortality Now 
You will also understand how the invisible man is "tied" 
to the physical body—by attachments, the mental and emo-
tional cords of desires for certain experiences on the physical 
plane. When by deeper meditation you can untie those cords, 
he will be free and you will know that you are a real image of 
God. Seek out that invisible man who is held captive in the 
jungle of physical sensations and matter. 
If you once understood the invisible man and the miracle 
of his outer physical body, his secondary body of light, and his 
inner body of ideas, you would realize what a wonderful cre-
ation you are! Concentrate on that invisible you. The visible 
man is a delusion,- the invisible man within is real. When you 
know this you will know that you are not bones and flesh; you 
are the indestructible invisible man. 
You cannot die! Dwell no more on thoughts of growing 
older and being ready for the grave. You are only getting ready 
for your immortal state! Nothing dies. The ideational blueprint 
of your body is always present in the ether. You feel that your 
loved ones who pass on are gone forever because you haven't 
the power of concentration necessary to behold them in their 
subtle forms in the astral world where they are. Keep your 
mind on these truths, repeating them to yourself whenever you 
have a quiet moment, "I am a prototype of God's thought. I am 
eternal, ever roaming in the kingdom of God." You are that 
deathless invisible man, and ever will be. Why not realize your 
immortality now? 
Your two physical eyes deceive you into thinking that this 

268  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
world of duality is real. Open your spiritual eye and behold 
your invisible form. If in the inner silence your spiritual eye is 
open, the invisible becomes visible. Whenever you are think-
ing, dreaming, or concentrating deeply, you are that invisible 
man. He is real; the visible man is the shadow. Forget  the 
shadow  and remember  the real. Be one with  the  invisible 
man—the reflection of God. 

What Are Ghosts? 
Self-Realization Fellowship Temple, 
Hollywood, California, July 22, 1945 
There are all kinds of tales about ghosts, devils, witches, 
vampires; and not a few persons have claimed to have had var-
ious experiences with such creatures. Of the several cases that 
have come to my attention, most of the persons involved suf-
fered from overly strong and diseased imaginations.  One of 
them, a woman, had chanced to read a book about vampires, 
and her imaginings were so vivid that she believed one of them 
was sucking her blood away each night. Whenever she visited 
me, she became well; but the idea of the nightly presence of a 
vampire  was  so strong  in her that  after  a time  she  would 
become ill again. She died prematurely, destroyed by her own 
thoughts. * 
In the sixteenth  century, belief in witchcraft was wide-
spread, and hundreds of persons suspected of being witches 
were falsely accused of being in league with the devil and were 
put to death. Joan of Arc was burned at the stake as one be-
witched. Even Jesus Christ, who was healing the sick and do-
ing only good, was accused of being in touch with Beelzebub. 
It is true that at various times evil spirits in possessed persons 
recognized Jesus and spoke to him, saying, "Let us alone; what 
have we to do with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth? art thou come 
to destroy us? I know  thee who thou art: the Holy One  of 
God."+ Jesus himself spoke of Satan* and of evil spirits, which 
* In the presence of a God-conscious master such as Sri Sri Paramahansa 
Yogananda, receptive devotees are often healed of mental or physical illness. 
Permanent cure usually depends on the continued faith and receptivity of the 
person healed. Those who revert to wrong thinking, as this woman did, permit 
the illness to return. (Publisher's  Note) 
t Luke  4:34.  t Luke  4:1-13. 
269 

