Lord, Possess Us with Thy Love 
Self-Realization Fellowship International Headquarters, Los 
Angeles, California, on Paramahansa)i's birthday, January 5, 1945, 
following traditional Indian ceremonies honouring the Guru's birth 
Each of us is a child of God. We are born of His spirit, in 
all its purity and glory and joy. That heritage is unassailable. 
To condemn oneself as a sinner, committed to the path of er-
ror, is the greatest of all sins. The Bible says: "Know ye not that 
ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth 
in you?"* 
Always remember: your Father loves you unconditionally. 
But because He has given you freedom to go away from Him or 
to approach Him, He is waiting for you to express your desire 
for His love before He comes to you. 
Once when I was meditating I heard His voice, whispering: 
"Thou dost say I am away, but thou didst not come in. That is 
why thou dost say I am away. I am always in. Come in and 
thou wilt see Me. I am always here, ready to greet thee." 
Deep sincerity is necessary in the spiritual path. In guile-
lessness comes the birth of Spirit. Jesus said: "Thou hast hid 
these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them 
unto babes."t Before God our human wisdom is nothing. The 
only way we can coax Him to surrender Himself to us is by of-
fering to Him the same unconditional love that He gives to us. 
Everyone will eventually find salvation, but those who 
tarry on the way fall into the ditch of indifference. Indifference 
prevents man from realizing how important it is to find God 
now, in this moment. Our great whirling planet, our human in-
dividuality, were not given to us merely that we might  exist 
for a time and then vanish into nothingness, but that we might 
* I Corinthians  3:16.  t Matthew  11:25. 
180 

LORD, POSSESS US WITH THY  LOVE  181 
question what it is all about. To live without understanding the 
purpose of life is foolish, a waste of time. The mystery of life 
surrounds us,- we were given intelligence in order to solve it. 
God Is the Lover Behind All Love 
I have realized, by searching for lasting love, that it was 
Someone Else who cared for me through all human loves. The 
Divine has loved me as mother, as father, and as friends. I 
searched for that one Friend behind all friends, that one Lover 
whom I now see glimmering in all your faces. And that Friend 
never fails me. 
God is behind everything.  "Honour thy father and thy 
mother,"* but "love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and 
with all thy soul, and with all thy might."+ You should under-
stand the importance of cultivating  divine friendship  with 
Him, and of not wasting any more time. How do you know, 
when you go to sleep, whether or not you will wake up? One 
by one we leave this earth. But there is nothing to grieve about. 
When we die, we are required to be reborn on earth, starting 
another life where we left off in this one. 
I behold life and death like the rise and fall of waves on the 
sea. At birth a wave rises from the surface, and at death it sinks 
into sleep in the bosom of God. I have realized this. I know I 
can never die; for whether I am sleeping in the ocean of Spirit 
or awake in a physical body, I am ever with Him. That supreme 
happiness cannot be found in the world; but we need not run 
away to the jungle to seek Him. We can find Him in this jun-
gle of daily life, in the cave of inner silence. 
It doesn't matter how many mistakes you have made,- they 
are only temporary. You are formed in the image of Spirit. The 
Lord created this delusory motion picture of earth and all its 
pleasures for but one purpose: that perchance you would see 
through His play of maya and forsake it to love Him alone. 
This is the truth; it cannot be otherwise. Why are we made to 
feel love for our family members, only to watch them  slip 
away, one by one? These events take place to help us realize 
that it is He who is loving us behind all loved ones. 
* Matthew  19:19 (Bible).  t Deuteronomy  6:5 (Bible). 

182  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
The difficulty about this motion picture of life is that all 
unrealities seem real, and all realities seem unreal. Each night 
in sleep the world is made to disappear from our consciousness, 
so we might understand that the material universe is not real. 
This lesson of sleep comes not to frighten us, but to make us 
seek the reality of God. The soul can never be satisfied with 
anything but Him and His love. His spirit is the reality that 
nothing else can match.* 
Don't Waste Time 
So many years are gone from our lives already. And only 
so many years, weeks, days, and hours are left. Don't  waste 
time. In your heart,  tell Him night  and day, "Lord,  I want 
Thee." Never be insincere about that. Never reason,  "Tomor-
row I will seek God. Today let me have a good time." Always 
say, "Today, my Lord, today I want Thee." 
Just now I see the great light of God spread everywhere— 
such joy, such light! "Lord, I bow to Thee on this beautiful oc-
casion in which Thou art born in us in new glory. May I always 
be blessed with awareness of Thy presence, and may each one 
of us here be thus blessed, that we may all know Thou  art 
seeking to be born anew in our consciousness." 
Love Him, talk to Him every second of your life, in activ-
ity and in silence, with deep prayer, with the unceasing desire 
of your heart; and you shall see the screen of delusion  melt 
away. He who is playing hide-and-seek in the beauty of flow-
ers, in souls, in noble passions, in dreams, shall come forth and 
say: "You and I have been apart for a long time, because I de-
sired that you give Me your love willingly. You are made in My 
image, and I wanted to see if you would use your freedom to 
give Me your love." 
I pray that God give you the imperishable gift of His love. 
But without effort you won't find Him. If you make  twenty-
five percent of the effort, the rest of it will come through God 
and guru. This evening has passed like a moment, for He has 
been with me every second. This is what I wanted to feel, that 
* "Of the unreal, there is no existence. Of the real, there is no nonexistence. The 
final truth of both of these is known by men of wisdom" (Bhagavad Gita 11:16). 

LORD, POSSESS US WITH THY LOVE  183 
you are showing appreciation to me merely to express your ap-
preciation of Him who sent me. May His blessings be ever with 
you; may His consciousness never leave you. May you realize, 
within and without, the fullness of His presence. 
Call God Your Own 
God doesn't readily respond to us, because we are shy be-
fore Him; we fail to show how much we want Him. Don't be 
afraid of Him. Call Him your own and pursue Him unceas-
ingly, in thought and in action, and you shall find Him to be 
the greatest haven of safety. 
"I offer the bouquet of these souls to Thee, O Father, that 
they may adorn the altar of Thy presence. Be Thou unceasingly 
with them. Father, Thou art the head of this family. We are 
Thy children, gathered together to sing the glory of Thy name. 
Banish the darkness of ignorance with Thy light; drive away all 
gloom from the shores of our minds with the expanding light 
of Thy presence. Naughty or good, we are Thy children. Reveal 
Thyself unto us. Bless everyone here. I feel their kind thoughts 
for me. All kindness, honour, respect, and love given to me, I 
offer to Thee, O Father! Thou art my love, my all. 
"Bless us with Thy grace. Destroy our desire for anything 
but Thee. Be Thou the King sitting on the throne of all our am-
bitions. Let the light of Thy glory spread over the vast world. 
Bless us all, saturate us with Thy presence. May we realize 
more and more that Thou hast always been ours. Thou art ours 
now; Thou wilt ever be ours. We thank Thee for the benedic-
tion and love Thou hast bestowed upon Thy family assembled 
here. May we all someday celebrate Thy birth in us in eternity, 
in immortality, and in unceasing joy." 
Pray with me: "Our Father, bless us that when we are free, 
we may gather in heaven to celebrate Thy birth within us. 
Manifest Thyself within and without. Unite us all; in the light 
of that union may we find Thy One Presence. With all the de-
votion of our merged hearts, of our united souls, we fall at Thy 
feet of omnipresence. Bless us that we never be indifferent to 
Thee. May an undying fire of love possess our hearts. We bow 
to Thee, our Father, our very own. Thy presence be with us 
now and forever." 

Controlling Your 
New Year's Destiny 
Self-Realization Fellowship Temple, 
Hollywood, California, January 2, 1944 
If you saturate with devotion a thought of God, and by 
your concentration impress that thought deep within you, then 
in the temple of superconsciousness the Lord of the universe 
will come to receive that loving thought. 
Ask God to help you fulfill all the good thoughts and res-
olutions that you are making now for the New Year. Resolve 
that you are going to do just what you think you should do, and 
that under no circumstances are you going to be cowed into do-
ing otherwise by your old bad habits. 
There was a great lesson for me in the book I have been 
writing. I used to write without ever reading over the manu-
script—a task I always avoided. But I had to go over and over 
every bit of my autobiography. * The Lord disciplined me, yet 
in a noble way, because I have enjoyed reliving those wondrous 
experiences as I read the account again. 
I have ventured many projects in this life. I have lectured, 
designed and built buildings, done artwork, played musical in-
struments, planted gardens, founded a school, but always the 
secret of my success was will power. I can truthfully say that 
destiny is what you make it. 
Analyse yourself. What happened to your good intentions 
and noble ambitions of the past year? Did you let them die for 
want of dynamic will-to-accomplish? Make a strong determi-
nation to avoid repetition of old errors in this New Year. Plan 
your time. Resolve that you are not going to be an automaton 
run by the world and by your own habits; that is not the way 
* Autobiography  of a Yogi. 
184 

CONTROLLING  YOUR NEW YEAR'S  DESTINY  185 
to  true happiness.  You must  change;  you must be able  to 
change.  Vague desire to improve is not enough. You have made 
yourself what you are now, and you can become whatever you 
want to be, but you have to use will power. 
More confining than stone walls are the prison bars of 
habit. You carry this invisible prison with you wherever you 
go. But you can be free! Determine now to break out of the jail 
of habits and race for freedom. How frightful life is, that from 
the age of three we are limited by habit. As soon as I realized I 
was caged in by habit I broke through all the bars. I would not 
permit myself to be bound by habits that made me say, "I can't 
do that," or, "I have to do this," or, "Don't do that to me, it 
makes me nervous," or, "I can't stand the cold," and so on. 
Why are these habits so strong from early childhood? Be-
cause they have been carried over from previous-life  experi-
ences. Our moods are inkmarks traced on the graph of life by 
the karma of the past. Wrong habits and moods are more of-
fensive than the odour of the skunk. Why behave like a human 
polecat, making everyone else uncomfortable and punishing 
yourself as well? At one time or another we all have done so, 
because we all have carried with us obnoxious peculiarities. 
Reclaim Your Lost Divinity 
But we can overcome undesirable traits. The human mind 
is elastic. If you pull it gradually, it will yield to your tugs. Yet 
you don't even try. God has given us more than enough power 
to overcome all the trials and shortcomings of our lives. Saint 
Francis, though ill and sightless, could heal the sick and raise 
the dead. Outwardly blind, inwardly he beheld the great Light 
of the universe. God puts His true children such as Saint Fran-
cis to greater tests than He gives to ordinary people. But no one 
passes through the gates of freedom until he has passed all 
God's tests, until he has learned to live like a true son of God. 
Why should you think of yourself as a weak mortal? You are 
potentially a son of God. You do not have to acquire anything; 
you have only to know. 
To try to be a millionaire in this incarnation is really much 
more difficult than to be a true son of God. Earthly environ-
ment  is  so  limited  that  many  people  die  without  having 

186  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
become what they want to be. But to know God is possible in 
one lifetime, because you don't have to acquire Him; He is 
already your own. 
Even if everyone were to pray day and night to become as 
rich as Henry Ford, their prayers could not be granted because 
earth is not a place where everybody can be a Henry Ford. But 
everyone can be rich in Spirit, for God has given everyone equal 
power to become like Him. When you claim your  divinity, 
everything belongs to you. A Henry Ford might lose his wealth 
or his health, but a Jesus Christ can create health or wealth or 
anything else he wants, at will. So don't long to be as rich or as 
healthy as someone else,- have only one desire: to be like God. 
Jesus never claimed that he was the only son of God. The Fa-
ther loves you, His child, just as much as He loves Jesus. And 
God won't deny you anything if, like Jesus, you establish your 
true status with Him. Meditation is the way to reclaim your 
lost divinity. 
Habits are grafts on our real nature, which is  ever-free 
Spirit. In my childhood I used to get very angry, but when I 
made up my mind not to, I never again gave in to anger. If I 
hadn't used my will I wouldn't have been able to accomplish 
that, or anything else in this life. You too can use your will. 
The errors of a lifetime can be corrected today. Make a resolu-
tion in this New Year to realize the truth that although as a 
mortal man you have certain habits, as a divine being you are 
free. Why should you lie to yourself? Why should you ascribe 
to yourself the faults of the past? You must destroy them. Oth-
erwise they will become grafts on your tree of life. You must 
not allow that. Affirm again and again: "I am a child of God. I 
am one with God." 
Apply Will and Discrimination to Resolution 
Every strong resolution you make with great  determina-
tion can become a habit at once. Why should you not be able 
to do what you wish, guided by reason? You must try. Away 
with all your faults! Review your actions of the past year. See 
what troublesome habits you may have displayed: perhaps you 
fight with people, or you eat too much, or you are jealous. 
Make up your mind today, and know  that you are never going 

CONTROLLING  YOUR NEW YEAR'S  DESTINY  187 
to do those things again. Just say to yourself, " Par amah ansa ji 
said he had an aversion to editing, but he became an editor; and 
if he could make himself an editor, I can do this." Why could-
n't you? Everything I have tried to do with will power has 
worked. And I give you hope that if you make up your mind, 
you too will succeed. God has given you the power to dynamite 
your troubles. "Beware, O ye mountains, stand not in my way! 
Your ribs will be shattered and tattered today!" Those words 
are from a song by a great swami." In another part he sang, "I 
hitch to my chariot the fates and the gods!" 
The Romans used to tie prisoners to chariots and drag 
them on the ground—a terrible practice! Yet in it is a lesson 
for us, for we allow our habits to treat us in the same way. We 
should make habits  our prisoners rather than our captors,-
hitching them to the chariot of our will, we should drive them 
instead of letting them drag us. To be able to do whatever we 
know we should do, not merely that which we whimsically 
want to do, is to be really free. 
Learn to discriminate in this New Year: examine every im-
pulse that comes, to see if it is the right thing for you to act on. 
And when your reason tells you to do a certain thing, let nei-
ther the fates nor the gods stand in your way. But if you find 
out that you are wrong, be able to change your mind. Some 
people are so stubborn, they do not want to admit they are 
wrong. But one should be guided by reason, not by blind will. 
If, after calmly reasoning, you make up your mind that what 
you have set out to do is right, then nobody should be able to 
stop you. If I had no job I would shake up the whole world un-
til people would say, "Give him a job to keep him quiet!" (I do 
not say these things out of personal pride, but that you may 
learn from my experiences.) 
Work of any kind, if done in the right spirit, gives you vic-
tory over yourself. You may clean bathrooms, but if you do it 
with the thought of serving and helping people, you are show-
ing the right spirit of a man of God. The attitude with which 
you work is what counts. Mental laziness and working un-
willingly spoil one. People often ask me, "How do you do so 
* Swami Ram Tirtha. 

188  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
many things?" It is because I do everything with the greatest 
pleasure and spirit of service. Inwardly I am all the time with 
God. And though I sleep very little I always feel fresh, because 
I perform my duties with the right attitude: that it is a privi-
lege to serve. 
You must realize that you are a child of God. Make up 
your mind that you are not going to be run by that old habit-
bound self. The temporary limitations and imperfections of the 
body and brain cannot hold you back; as soon as you give the 
verdict and strongly will to be a new person, you will change. 
You have been a prisoner of your habits and it has not been 
good for you. It is because of wrong habits of thinking and act-
ing in this and in other lives that your bodily kingdom yields 
now to invasions of disease, troubles, moods, and ignorance. 
From now on you must say: "I am not the slave of the body. I 
am the dictator of my own kingdom. My thoughts are going to 
be exactly as I wish them to be." Once you have changed your 
habits, you will say to yourself, "How simple it was to do it! 
How unkind I have been to myself by not exchanging my soul-
stultifying habits for those that bring happiness." 
Are You a Psychological Antique? 
Habit-bound people can best be described as psychological 
antiques. They are the same, year in and year out. They say the 
same old things, do the same old things. Converse with them 
just a little while and you can anticipate exactly what their 
next remark will be. Take a look in the mirror of introspection 
and see if you are a psyclological antique. Most people are. 
But why should you be one? Change your habits. Cast out 
moods. Try to be better every day. Let people be able to say, 
"What a wonderful change has come over him!" 
The man of Self-realization has achieved mastery over the 
old habit-dulled self. Recognizing such mastery in Jesus, the of-
ficers who had been sent by the Pharisees to arrest him came 
away marvelling instead at his assurance, saying, "Never man 
spake like this man."* A master's nature is infinite,- it cannot 
be contained in the narrow confines of human  conceptions. 
Every time I thought I had succeeded in categorizing my guru, 
* John  7:46. 

CONTROLLING  YOUR NEW YEAR'S  DESTINY  189 
Swami Sri Yukteswarji, I found him to be different, greater, 
nonclassifiable. 
Sometime you have to break the habit of attachment  to 
the mortal body and get back to God. There is no alternative. 
You are a prodigal son here on earth. Your infinite nature must 
be rediscovered. You will never be happy so long as you remain 
habit-mired in ignorance of your eternal soul-nature. It does 
not matter who you are; the only way you can find lasting joy 
is to go back to God. You do not have to leave earth's shores 
and put on wings; you must learn rather to be happy here and 
now, under all conditions; and to include others' happiness in 
your own joy. Go out of your way to make others happy. You 
cannot please everybody, but to those souls who cross your 
path, give kindness and love. There is no more liberating action 
than sincerely to give people kindness in return for unkind-
ness. Why not be like a flower that gives fragrance even when 
crushed in the hand? The Gita teaches: "He who is free from 
hatred toward all creatures, is friendly and kind to all... is dear 
to Me."* 
If people criticize you, do not ignore them. See if you have 
the fault they ascribe to you, and if you do, silently  correct 
your error. But it is seldom necessary to confess your faults to 
others; often it is unwise. Should they become angry with you, 
they might unkindly hold your confession over your head as a 
threat. To a God-realized spiritual teacher or guru you can tell 
your faults, but not to someone who cannot help you, and who 
might instead hurt you by broadcasting your flaws to others. 
A Stream of Divine Power 
Learn to mix with good people. The faces of many of you 
who come here have become more spiritual. And the more you 
are in tune with me and refrain from fussing about little things, 
the better you will be. A steady stream of divine power will 
flow to you, for the Great Ones sent me here. When I am gone 
you will realize this truth with greater impact. I am here only 
to deliver their message. Little by little a spiritual change will 
come to the true followers of this path, and their influence will 
spread over the world. Self-Realization [Yogoda Satsanga] is one 
*  Bhagavad Gita XII: 13-14. 

190  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
of the greatest spiritual movements ever sent to help mankind. 
It has been blessed by the Great  Ones—Mahavatar  Babaji, 
Lahiri Mahasaya, Sri Yukteswarji—in communion with Christ 
and Krishna. The grace of these masters is not gone from the 
earth. They are waiting to help you and to help the world, but 
they can work only through the free choice of man. The world 
has gone mad with hate and war, but Jesus' way of brotherly 
love is the solution to the world's problems. We can make this 
world proof against war by following his teachings as he meant 
us to. 
On this last meditation day,* Christ came to me several 
times: first as a little child, then as a grown man, and finally as 
he looked before his crucifixion. I had been thinking that I 
would have to meditate long, before he would come to me. And 
he surprised me! God was showing me through this experience 
that no further effort is needed once you have convinced Him 
that you want Him more than all the gifts of the world. Then 
He takes away the screen of mystery and comes to you as 
Christ and Krishna, or Babaji, or as any great incarnation in 
whose form you desire to behold Him. 
Make up your mind that in this New Year you are going to 
be more Christlike in your behaviour. You must make the ef-
fort now. You must meditate more. Self-Realization Fellowship 
[Yogoda Satsanga Society of India] was not brought into exis-
tence merely to give glimpses of God through words, but that 
you might know Him through your own experience. We teach 
that true fellowship with man can come only after one has 
gained experience of God. If you contact God within yourself, 
you will know that He is in everyone, that He has become the 
children of all races. Then you cannot be an enemy to anyone. 
If the whole world could love with that universal love there 
would be no need for men to arm themselves against one an-
other. By our own Christlike example we must bring unity 
among all religions, all nations, all races. 
We must train ourselves to plain living and high thinking. 
It would be good if each family had a small garden in which to 
grow some of their food. Live more simply, so that you can find 
* The annual Self-Realization Fellowship all-day Christmas meditation. (See 
footnote on page 51.) 

CONTROLLING  YOUR NEW YEAR'S  DESTINY  191 
time to enjoy the little pleasures of life. Man races through his 
span, working, eating, sleeping; and that is about all he ac-
complishes. Eliminate any habit or activity that disturbs your 
mental peace and happiness. 
In this New Year, resolve to cast out from the temple of 
your mind all the devils of bad habits; to plan your life so that 
you can do all the things you want to do. If it is happiness you 
want, have it! There is nothing that can stop you. You are an 
immortal child of God, and all the difficulties that visit you are 
meant only to stimulate you to higher achievements. 
The Best Resolution—Give More Time to God 
Choose which habits you are going to destroy in the New 
Year. Make up your mind about them and stick to your deci-
sion. Resolve to give more time to God: to meditate regularly 
every day, and on one night each week to meditate  several 
hours, so that you can feel your spiritual progress in God. Re-
solve that you are going to practise Kriya Yoga regularly and 
that you are going to control your appetites and emotions. Be 
a master! Make up your mind strongly now. 
Think of the good resolutions you have made in the past— 
that you were not going to be dictated to by your old habits and 
thoughts. But have you kept them? It is an insult to your soul 
and to God to give in to your weaknesses. Be master of your-
self, captain of your destiny. Danger and you were born to-
gether, and you are the elder brother, more dangerous than dan-
ger! Do not lose the courage and determination that you feel as 
you listen to me now. Pray with me: 
"Heavenly Father, give us the strength to carry out all our 
good resolutions in the New Year. May we always please Thee 
by our actions. Our spirits are willing. Help us to materialize 
all our worthy wishes in the New Year. We will reason, we will 
will, we will act; but guide Thou our reason, will, and activity 
to the right thing that we should do in everything. Aum. Peace. 
Amen." 

How to Outwit  Temptation 
Self-Realization Fellowship International Headquarters, Los 
Angeles, California, November 15, 1934 
Satan, or cosmic delusion, is always snaring us through 
our ignorance. That is how he obstructs God. The Lord could 
easily destroy Satan, but prefers to overcome him by  love. 
Whenever we choose the divine offerings of eternal joy instead 
of the passing pleasures of the senses, the Adversary is robbed 
of his dark power. So it is up to us to cooperate with our Heav-
enly Father, that the Devil may be vanquished. 
Whenever you are slothful and careless, you help Satan to 
pull you toward his side. Jesus prayed: "Lead us not into temp-
tation, but deliver us from evil."* Temptation is not our own 
creation; it belongs to the world of maya, and all men are sub-
ject to it. But to enable us to free ourselves, God gave us rea-
son, conscience, and will power. 
To give our approval to sinful activities is to find ourselves 
in trouble. When by our wrong thoughts we fall into the pit of 
error, we should pray: "Father, leave us not here, but pull us 
out through the force of our reason and will. And when we are 
out, if it  is Thy  will to test us further,  first  make  Thyself 
known to us—that we may realize that Thou art more tempt-
ing than temptation." 
So long as you feel unwilling to deny yourself some par-
ticular pleasure that is detrimental to your welfare, you are in 
the region of Satan; the evil results of succumbing to harmful 
sense lures will at one time or another overtake you. But if you 
are convinced that temptation is dangerous to you because it 
promises happiness and in the end gives sorrow, you can out-
wit the Devil. 
* Matthew 6:13. 
192 

HOW TO OUTWIT  TEMPTATION  193 
Why Sense Experiences Are Alluring 
Temptations are alluring; there is no doubt about that. Our 
sensory powers are all directed to the outer world. There is a 
current of life energy flowing from the brain through the nerves 
into the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, and skin. The sensations we 
experience through these instruments are the result of this out-
ward-flowing current, and we tend to like the feeling. That is 
the appeal of the senses. Overindulging them is dangerous; un-
til a man is established in wisdom, the outgoing energy leads 
him into sense bondage. 
By the five-rayed searchlight of the senses, we perceive and 
explore the world of matter. Through the senses we learn to 
like things that are pleasing to see, hear, smell,  taste,  and 
touch. The desire for a particular sensation becomes a habit. 
The trouble is, most people have not had any experience of the 
Spirit, which is hidden behind matter; hence they have no stan-
dard of comparison between the exciting, pleasurable percep-
tions of the senses and the unknown ineffable bliss of the soul. 
And there is no chance to compare until one has renounced or 
become mentally insusceptible to all sense enticements. The 
only way to avoid the trap is to realize by reason or experience 
that there are higher joys. 
Habit Is a Pitiless Dictator 
Commandments to refrain from harmful experiences are 
generally futile. Whenever you order a person not to do some-
thing, he immediately wants to do it. The taste of forbidden 
fruits is sweet in the beginning, but in the end, bitter. Yet no 
matter how much suffering people experience, they go on do-
ing the same self-harming things. Once you have established a 
liking for a certain sensory experience, the habit sits like a dic-
tator in the brain and commands you to indulge yourself, even 
though it is against your best interests. You don't want to re-
peat an act, and yet you do it. Try never to let yourself reach a 
point where you become such a victim of wrong habits. You 
must be the master of yourself; do not let any habit control 
you. Whenever the desire for a particular sensory experience 
becomes habitual, it is time to stop that practice. 
I used to be fond of ginger ale because it reminded me of 

194  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
our lemonade in India. Some students arranged to have this 
beverage on hand for me wherever I went. One day I found my 
supply was all gone, and I missed it. "Mr. Ginger Ale," I said, 
"you have gone too far, and I hadn't even realized it! Goodbye." 
The next day I purposely drank a little ginger ale as a test, and 
it tasted terrible. My thought of the previous day had been so 
strong that the desire was banished immediately. 
I never miss anything that is taken away from me or that 
I voluntarily give up. No physical comfort can bind me. I have 
tried it out. You must be able to pass through all experiences 
of life without attachment.  Lord Krishna said: "The man of 
self-control, roaming among material objects with subjugated 
senses, and devoid of attraction and repulsion, attains an un-
shakable inner calmness."* Any time you have  to have some-
thing—a soft bed, a pillow, or whatever—remember that you 
are putting yourself into slavery; and when your will and dis-
crimination are held captive by binding sense attachments, you 
will lose the infinite kingdom of God. Jesus is still enjoying the 
transcendental  ecstasy  that he experienced when he  resur-
rected himself in the Lord. But those who exist in ignorance, 
subject to the pressures of desires, will continue that way life 
after life until they resist worldly seductions. 
You should be careful not to let anything hurt your true 
happiness. Corroding emotions of anger, greed, and jealousy, 
and overstimulation by sex, alcohol, or drugs are extremely 
detrimental to you, for they prevent the realization of soul joy. 
Never abuse the sensory powers by overindulgence,  if you 
would be really happy. "Ever fed, never satisfied; never fed, 
ever satisfied" is a true axiom about unwholesome sense ex-
periences. 
Wisdom Is Man's Best Protection 
Protect yourself within the fortress of wisdom. There is no 
greater safety. Complete understanding will bring you to a 
point where nothing can hurt you. But until you have attained 
wisdom,  when  temptation  comes  you  must  first  stop  the 
action or urge, and then  reason. If you try to reason first, you 
will be compelled in spite of yourself to do the thing that you 
* Bhagavad Gita 11:64. 

HOW TO OUTWIT TEMPTATION  195 
don't want to do, because temptation will overcome all reason. 
Just say "No!" and get up and go away. That is the surest way 
to escape the Devil. The more you develop this "won't" power 
during the intrusion of temptation, the happier you will be; for 
all joy depends on the ability to do that which conscience tells 
you you should  do. 
Don't let your environment  and sensory desires  control 
you. Virtue and spiritual living are far more charming than sen-
sual indulgence, but the habit chains of temptation hold peo-
ple fast. If the Lord once tempted you with His love, you would 
want nothing more. Nothing else would interest you. When 
you are convinced that He is the most desirable Treasure, noth-
ing on the material plane can ever again tempt you and over-
come your power of discrimination. 
To know God is the only worthwhile ambition to have, be-
cause He is happiness everlasting. We should want Him be-
cause He is the panacea for all our suffering. He is the answer 
to all our needs. The very things that our hearts cry for—love, 
fame, wisdom, everything else—we find in communion with 
that Complete One. Even if you are the most famous man in 
the world, death will be the end of your awareness of fame,- you 
will not know then that people adore you. But Jesus, is aware 
that his devotees love him; because his consciousness is one 
with the consciousness of God manifesting throughout  cre-
ation,  the  Christ  Intelligence [Kutastha  Chaitanya],  om-
nipresent, omniscient, ever living. 
So why strive hard to have something you will lose just as 
you cross the portals of the grave? Money, fame, prestige, sense 
indulgence, material comfort—these are all pseudo pleasures, 
offered by Satan in place of the real joy of divine communion. 
Remember that temptatioi) is powerful only because you have 
no sense of comparison with anything better. When you are 
strongly tempted, your wisdom is momentarily a prisoner of 
your desires and habits. But the highest way to freedom is to 
be so merged in the inexhaustible joy of God that you are able 
to relinquish all worldly pleasures in an instant. 
If you find true joy in this life, you will have it now and in 
the afterlife too. Which do you want: God's eternal bliss, which 

196  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
may be yours by denying yourself a few pleasures now? or 
worldly happiness now, which will not last? Convince your 
heart by comparison. Every effort that you make to climb up-
ward will be recognized by God. 
Even If You Are the Greatest Sinner, Forget It 
Don't think of yourself as a sinner. You are a child of the 
Heavenly Father. No matter if you are the greatest sinner, forget 
it. If you have made up your mind to be good, then you are no 
longer a sinner. "Even a consummate evildoer who turns away 
from all else to worship Me exclusively may be counted among 
the good, because of his righteous resolve. He will fast become 
a virtuous man and obtain unending peace. Tell all assuredly, O 
Arjuna, that My devotee never perishes!"*  Start with a clean 
slate and say: "I have always been good; I was only dreaming that 
I was bad." It is true: evil is a nightmare and does not belong to 
the soul. 
Temptation is sugarcoated poison; it tastes delicious, but 
death is certain. The happiness that people look for in this 
world does not endure. Divine joy is eternal. Yearn for that 
which is lasting, and be hardhearted about rejecting the imper-
manent pleasures of life. You have to be that way. Don't let the 
world rule you. Never forget that the Lord is the only reality. 
The real love of your Cosmic Father is playing hide-and-seek 
with you in your heart. Your true happiness lies in your expe-
rience of Him. 
Man is sunk in a dream of ignorance, imagining that he is 
suffering with illness and sorrow and poverty. Once when King 
Janaka, a great Indian saint, was deep in prayer, he suddenly ex-
claimed, "Who is in my temple today? I thought it was myself, 
but I see the Eternal is there. And the little self, this body-bun-
dle of bones, is not I. It is the Infinite that is in my body. I bow 
to Myself. I offer flowers to Myself." Someday that realization 
will come to you, and you will no longer think you are a mor-
tal, a man or a woman,- you will know that you are a soul, 
made in the divine image, "and that the Spirit of God dwelleth 
in you."+ 
* Bhagavad Gita IX:30-31. 
II Corinthians  3:16 (Bible). 

HOW TO OUTWIT  TEMPTATION  197 
The soul is bound to the body by a chain of desires, temp-
tations, troubles, and worries, and it is trying to free itself. If 
you keep tugging at that chain which is holding you to mortal 
consciousness, someday an invisible Divine Hand will inter-
vene and snap it apart, and you will be free. 
Protect yourself against temptation and sorrow by reason 
and by communion with God. In the Bhagavad Gita the Lord 
says: "The ignorant, oblivious of My transcendental nature as 
the Maker of all creatures, discount also My presence within 
the human form."*  Meditation is simply reminding yourself 
again and again that you are not the limited physical body, but 
the Infinite Spirit. Meditation is arousing the memory of your 
real Self and forgetting what you imagine you are. If a drunken 
prince goes into the slums and, forgetting entirely his true iden-
tity, begins lamenting, "How poor I am," his friends will laugh 
at him and say, "Wake up, and remember that you are a prince." 
You have been likewise in a state of hallucination, think-
ing you are a helpless mortal, struggling and miserable. Every 
day you should sit quietly and affirm, with deep conviction: 
"No birth, no death, no caste have I; father, mother, have I 
none. Blessed Spirit, I am He.t I am the Infinite Happiness." If 
you again and again repeat these thoughts, day and night, you 
will eventually realize what you really are: an immortal soul. 
Fix Your Mind in the Divine Consciousness of Meditation 
Temptation, greed, attachment to people and possessions, 
slavery to the senses, ignorance of your Spirit-nature, idleness, 
and mechanical living are the worst enemies of your happiness. 
Be busy working, with your mind fixed in the divine  con-
sciousness that is cultivated by meditation, for then you will 
be really happy and you will be really living. 
When  I started meditating,  I could not  imagine that  I 
would ever find such joy in it. But as time went on, the more I 
meditated, the greater became my peace and bliss. 
If you are getting tired of the life you are leading, and yet 
you go on filling it with more possessions and more desires for 
* IX: 11. 
t From a famous song by Swami Shankara, peerless exponent of Vedic monism. 
(See glossary.) 

198  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
new experiences, you are on the wrong road. The surest way to 
avoid temptation is to lead a natural life: a life in harmony 
with God. Don't lead an unnatural existence, restlessly seek-
ing happiness from a world that is powerless to bestow it. Life 
is too precious. Every day I pray to Him: "Take  everything 
away from me if it is Your desire. I am trying to do my best, Fa-
ther, but know this for certain: above all I want to please You. 
I will try to please others, too, but more than anything else I 
want to please you." When you pray like that you may suffer 
many tests of desires. But as you go on fighting wrong habits 
and tendencies, He begins gradually to come upon you,- finally 
you will see that like a great flood He has swept away all your 
undesirable traits. 
Krishna said: "The man who physically fasts from sense 
objects finds that the sense objects fall away for a little while, 
leaving behind only the longing for them. But he who beholds 
the Supreme is freed even from longings."* Banish all darkness 
by His light, and evil thoughts by good thoughts.  Eliminate 
temptation by discovering God's superior attraction in medita-
tion. That is the best weapon against temptation. Any time 
you feel that your will is being overpowered, meditate until 
you feel the Divine Presence. 
* Bhagavad Gita: 11:59. 

Curing Mental Alcoholics 
Circa 1949 
The individual who drinks too much forms a pernicious 
habit. If he makes no effort to curb his indulgence in liquors, 
he may become an alcoholic and helplessly suffer from an over-
whelming desire to drink without any limit, without rhyme or 
reason. Such unfortunate people often spend all their money on 
drink; they eat very little and seem to get some nourishment 
from the liquor itself. The normal sense of responsibility to-
ward maintaining good health and an honourable standing in 
the family, society, and the world is lost. They may eventually 
lose all sense of pride and be picked up dead drunk anywhere— 
in a ditch, or in the middle of the street—exposed meanwhile 
to the dangers of being robbed or run over. 
The foregoing description of liquor alcoholics serves  to 
illustrate what I mean by "mental alcoholics." The latter may 
be individually classified according to their particular psycho-
logical  extreme,  which  might  be  chronic  anger,  fear,  sex, 
sadism, gambling, stealing, jealousy, hate, greed, moods, crafti-
ness, or stupidity. 
When from the very beginning of life a person  displays 
extraordinary tantrums of anger, fear, jealousy—or any other of 
the aforementioned characteristics—then one may know that 
he has acquired those abnormal mental habits in a previous 
existence. 
Parents who notice any such evil psychological tendencies 
in their child, even in its infancy, should get busy and take 
some steps to prevent the child from becoming a psychological 
alcoholic; if possible, by placing him in another  environment 
under the good care of spiritual teachers. 
Through  continued good company and proper  environ-
ment for many years, a mental alcoholic may become free from 
the octopus grip of the inborn evil. While the mental alcoholic 
199 

200  MAN'S ETERNAL QUEST 
is receiving thoughtful care in a good environment, the evil 
consequences of his bad habits should be explained to him, and 
he should be encouraged to reason with himself about them 
and to make a distinct effort not to display them under any 
circumstances. Each indulgence in a prenatally acquired men-
tal habit makes it stronger and stronger, until the possessor 
becomes literally a slave to it. 
A False Conception 
The angry man, the sexual man, the greedy man forgets 
his own position, and his relations with society, and commits 
great blunders that ruin his life and the lives of others. Many 
of these mental alcoholics think that if they give expression 
to their psychological habits,  they will feel somewhat  re-
lieved. But the self-indulgent habit of giving in to harmful 
impulses is extremely pernicious, for it is by repetition of 
such evil expressions that a person becomes a chronic mental 
alcoholic, making a fool of himself anytime and anywhere. 
If children are exposed to an evil environment while their 
minds are in a plastic state, they will develop wrong habits 
that, unchecked, may lead to chronic mental alcoholism. Par-
ents who notice a sudden change in a child—perhaps a calm-
natured boy suddenly turns  into a repeatedly angry  boy— 
should  immediately  take  care  of  this.  The  causes  of  his 
frustrations should be determined and removed, and new av-
enues for constructive use of his energies sought. 
Those who habitually display any of the foregoing traits are 
mental alcoholics. They recklessly ride down the Niagara Falls 
of continuous bad habits, smashing their happiness to pieces as 
they helplessly but willingly indulge in uncontrolled expression 
of their worst traits. It is not good to remonstrate with mental 
alcoholics who frequently display violent moods of disgust and 
boredom with the world. Their attitude is a result of their con-
tinuous repetition of wrong habits. They should be treated as 
psychological patients suffering from chronic mental diseases. 
Counteractive Influences 
A change of company is the best remedy for acute mental 
alcoholism of any kind, for the will of the mental alcoholic has 

CURING MENTAL  ALCOHOLICS  201 
become a slave to habit; hence he has no resistance whatsoever 
to evil. The most effective cure is to move him immediately to 
an environment that will be a specific antidote to his toxic 
mental condition. 
If possible, the angry mental alcoholic should be placed 
with one or more individuals who do not become angry, even 
under irritating circumstances. The sexual person ought to be 
surrounded by self-controlled people; the habitual thief needs 
the society of honest people. The chronically timid can be 
helped by association with the brave, and by reading stories of 
men who were heroes. Moody or scornful or "sourpuss" types 
should have the companionship of habitually cheerful people. 
A mental alcoholic should remember that poor elimina-
tion, and eating meat (beef and pork especially), will aggravate 
his psychological malady, fixing it even more firmly in his 
brain. An abundance of fruits and vegetables in the daily diet, 
and each week a one-day fast on fruit juices—with a longer fast 
occasionally—will greatly help to change the cerebral grooves 
that entrench the pernicious habits. 
Sexual excess impairs the nervous system and the brain 
cells, which in turn aggravates anger in a mental  alcoholic. 
Overindulgence in sex destroys will power, also. Hence all 
mental alcoholics should learn control over the sex impulse, 
that they may practice moderation in marital relations, as na-
ture intended. 
Petty Dictators 
Often we find that the breadwinners in a family—father or 
son or, sometimes, mother or daughter—display a tendency 
toward mental alcoholism because of the consciousness  that 
they are in a position to dictate. Such little dictators in families 
should not freely unload their moods on innocent,  harmless 
dependents, and thus lose the inner respect of those around 
them. When a family dictator thinks he can get away with 
doing what he pleases at home, he gradually begins to do what 
he pleases in expressing unpleasant moods or evil traits outside 
the family. Eventually he does this anytime and anywhere. If 
petty family tyrants don't check  their indulgence in  these 
sadistic habits,  they gradually become mental  alcoholics, 

202  MAN'S ETERNAL QUEST 
behaving immaturely and causing untold trouble to those who 
are closely or even casually associated with them, as well as to 
themselves. 
If you are a mental alcoholic,  try to cure yourself;  but 
meanwhile refrain at least from trying to infect or influence 
others. For whether or not you succeed, you will  probably 
cause  yourself  added  trouble.  Think  what  pandemonium 
would break loose if suddenly somebody dropped a skunk in 
your peaceful home, where you had been sitting quietly medi-
tating or reading a book by the fireplace. You and those around 
you would no doubt try to evict the skunk, and in so doing be 
drenched with its malodorous chemicals. Both the family and 
the skunk would suffer. 
So it is not wise for a human skunk to enter an environ-
ment where he is unwanted. He is likely to cause trouble for 
everyone around him, and in the end may suffer harsh treat-
ment. Please remember that a human skunk carrying a mental 
vibration of terrible moods, and the reflection of it on his face, 
creates incalculable harm in peaceful environments; this biped 
is unwanted anywhere. 
It is better even to hide mental alcoholism than to give in 
to its influence in public. Continued shameless indulgence is 
the soil in which prenatal or postnatal tendencies thrive. The 
individual who is prenatally disposed to mental  alcoholism 
must be doubly careful not to live in an environment that wa-
ters the innate psychological seeds of his bad habits or moods. 
Of course, when you meet a person who treats you for-
mally, and with a galvanized smile says, "How do you do, I am 
awfully delighted to see you," while inside he is thinking,  "I 
could cheerfully chop off your head for disturbing me," you 
sense his inner feeling and you don't like it. I myself like to 
know where I stand with people. I prefer blunt treatment to 
hypocritical behaviour. No one likes to risk having the snake 
of insincerity dart out at him from under a rosebush of smiles. 
However, it is better for a mental alcoholic to be friendly 
toward people, even if hypocritically, than to vent on them his 
evil moods. Self-control practised daily, even in insignificant 
matters, will help the mental alcoholic to come out of his 
drunken indulgences little by little. 

Overcoming Malignant Moods 
First Self-Realization Fellowship Temple at 
Encinitas, California, March 5, 1939 
Moods are not easily defined; but you know what they are. 
When you are in a mood, your behaviour is not natural; you are 
not the person you should be. The end result is that you feel 
wretched. And how foolish it is to be unhappy through your 
own doing! Nobody likes  misery. Why not analyse yourself 
next time you are in a mood? You will see how you are will-
ingly, willfully making yourself miserable. And while you are 
doing so, others around you feel the unpleasantness of your 
state of mind. Wherever you go, you tell about yourself with-
out speaking, because your whole mood carries its vibrations 
in your eyes, and anyone looking at you is aware of the nega-
tivity recorded there. Seeing the dark feelings reflected in your 
eyes, others are repelled; they want to stay away from those 
discomforting vibrations. You must remove moods from your 
mental mirror before you can remove their reflection  from 
your eyes. 
We Live in a Glass House 
You are living in the glass house of this world, and every-
one else is watching you. You cannot pose,- you have to live a 
natural life. So why not behave in such a way that others will 
look up to you? Why should they not see joy in your face? All 
your good qualities are covered up inside by your moodiness. 
Not only are others observing how you conduct yourself; 
you also are studying how they behave. Because you tend to 
make comparisons as a result of constantly watching  those 
around you, you fall into moods. Or you may become moody 
over the  endless  difficulties  one  encounters  in this  world. 
203 

204  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
Moods are often a result of environmental influences. Each one 
of us is affected in different ways by the world about us. But 
you should not allow yourself to indulge in moods over exter-
nal conditions. Why should you take on the effects of your 
environment? There are people who resort to moods in an at-
tempt to avoid facing some problem. But moodiness is neither 
an escape nor an emotional safety valve. It is natural now and 
then to fall momentarily into a mood; but don't hold on to it! 
Each type of mood has a specific cause, and it lies within 
your own mind. To remove a mood you must remove its cause. 
One should introspect each day in order to understand the na-
ture of his mood, and how to correct it, if it is a harmful one. 
Perhaps you find yourself in an indifferent state of mind. No 
matter what is suggested, you are not interested. It is necessary 
then to make a conscious effort to create some positive inter-
est. Beware of indifference, which ossifies your progress in life 
by paralysing your will power. 
Perhaps your mood is discouragement over sickness; a feel-
ing that you will never regain health. You must try to apply the 
laws of right living that lead to a healthy, active, and moral life, 
and pray for greater faith in the healing power of God. 
Or suppose your mood is a conviction that you are a fail-
ure, and can never succeed at anything. Analyse the problem 
and see if you have really made all the effort you could have. 
Consider the hard work of the president of the United States. 
He has to try to please all the forty-eight states,*  and other 
nations as well. We have to marvel that it is possible for a 
man to understand so much and undertake so much. And as 
there is such a difference between the working capacity of the 
ordinary man and that of the president, how much greater the 
difference between that of the president and God, who is infi-
nitely busier! God is managing the whole universe, down to 
the  most  minute  detail—and we are made  in His  image. 
Therefore we cannot make excuses for failure to succeed. Don't 
be afraid of hard work; it has never hurt anyone. However, one 
should learn to work—and to think—calmly. When you are 
* Alaska and Hawaii were not yet states at the time Paramahansaji made this 
observation. (Publisher's Note) 

