230  MAN'S ETERNAL QUEST 
They are not hallucinations. True visions are emanations of 
reality. 
Divine Justice and the Law of Reincarnation 
You may or may not believe in the law of reincarnation; 
but if this life is the beginning and the end of human existence, 
it is impossible  to reconcile  the inequalities  of life with a 
divine justice. Why is one man born in a rich family, whereas 
another child arrives in a poverty-stricken home, only to die of 
starvation? Why is one person healthy enough to live 100 years, 
and someone else sick all the time? Why are Eskimos born in 
the cold north and other peoples in moderate climates, where 
the struggle to survive is easier? Why are some babies born 
blind, or dead? Why? Why? Why? If you were God, would you 
do such unjust things? What is the use of reading and living 
according to the scriptures, if life is predestined by a whimsical 
God who deliberately creates beings with bodies or brains that 
are imperfect? 
According to the law of cause and effect,  every  action 
creates a commensurate reaction. Therefore whatever is hap-
pening to us now must be a result of something we have done 
previously. If there is nothing in this life to account for present 
circumstances,  the inescapable conclusion is that the  cause 
was set in motion at some prior time; that is, in some past hu-
man existence. Your strongest moods and character tendencies 
did not begin with this birth; they were established in your 
consciousness  long before.  Thus  we may  understand  how 
some persons show from early childhood certain definite talents, 
or weaknesses, and so on. 
We may understand, too, how the perfect life of Jesus on 
earth was the result of several previous incarnations in which 
he had developed self-mastery. His miraculous life as Christ 
was the result of many past lives of spiritual schooling.  He 
became an avatar,*  a divine incarnation, because in previous 
lives as an ordinary human being he fought the temptations of 
the flesh and conquered. His example gives the rest of mankind 
definite hope. Otherwise, what chance have we? If God had 
sent angels to teach us I would say, "Lord, why didn't  You 
* See glossary. 

WILL JESUS REINCARNATE AGAINf  231 
create me as an angel? How can I emulate beings who were 
created perfect and who have had no experience with the tests 
and temptations that You have given me?" 
We need for our ideal a being who is essentially like us. 
Jesus had  temptations to face. "Get thee behind me,  Satan/' 
he said. And he conquered. Had he never known  temptation, 
his saying,  "Get  thee behind me, Satan," would have been 
playacting, and how could that inspire us? Although he had 
already conquered the flesh in other lives, he had to feel its 
weaknesses again in his incarnation as Jesus, to show human-
ity by his mastery how high he had grown spiritually, and to 
give heart to all men by his example. 
Jesus Was Eliseus in His Former Life 
Jesus attained most of his perfection in his former incar-
nation  as  Eliseus  (Elisha).  I know  for  certain  that  he  was 
Eliseus in a past life, and that Jesus' guru, John the Baptist, was 
Elijah (Elias), in his former life.*  Eliseus' later incarnation as 
Jesus was foretold  several  hundred years before  the  event, 
because he was destined to fulfill a divine plan of God's. That 
prophecy is told in the Book of Isaiah (7:14), eight  centuries 
before Christ: "Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a 
sign: Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall 
call his name Immanuel." St. Matthew, recording the event of 
Christ's birth, stated: "Now all this was done, that it might be 
fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying, 
Behold, a virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, 
and they shall call his name Emmanuel, which being inter-
preted is, God with us."t 
Jesus had learned all of life's lessons in this school of many 
incarnations, and had demonstrated his complete victory over 
material consciousness. That is why the Heavenly Father said 
of him, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, "t 
Jesus was sent on earth as an example, that God's other 
children might know one who had overcome the delusions of 
this world. Great as he was, Jesus nonetheless said humbly: "I 
* Referring to John the Baptist, Jesus said, "And if ye will receive it, this is 
Elias, which was for to come" [Matthew  11:14). 
t Matthew  1:22-23.  * Matthew  3:17. 

232  MAN'S ETERNAL QUEST 
do nothing of myself; but as my Father hath taught me."*  His 
entire love was for God. His whole consciousness was absorbed 
in the Father. 
We are all children of God. Many incarnations  ago He 
created us as He created Jesus. In the Gospel of St. John we find 
Jesus himself declaring: "Is it not written in your law, I said, 
Ye are gods?"+ Jesus was made in the image of God, as are we
; 
and he conquered delusion, showing us how to do likewise. If 
you conquer delusion in this life you will go back to God and 
reincarnate no more.  "Him  that overcometh will I make a 
pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go no more out."* 
But will Jesus come again? Metaphysically, he is already 
omnipresent. He smiles at you through every flower. He feels 
his cosmic body in every speck of space. Every movement of 
the wind breathes the breath of Jesus. Through his  oneness 
with the divine Christ Consciousness [Kutastha Chaitanya]  he 
is incarnate in all that lives. If you have eyes to behold, you can 
see him enthroned throughout creation. 
One who is liberated, as Jesus is, becomes one with Spirit. 
Yet he retains his individuality; for once God has created a 
human being, He keeps in His cosmic consciousness a perma-
nent record of that creation. Every thought and action of every 
creature is recorded in the consciousness of God. Jesus referred 
to  this  when  he  said,  "Are not  five  sparrows  sold for  two 
farthings, and not one of them is forgotten before God?"§ 
Christ Comes in Vision and in the Flesh to His Devotees 
Jesus as an individual personality can reincarnate in two 
ways: in vision and in the flesh. If you have great devotion you 
can see him inwardly exactly as he appeared when he lived on 
earth. A number  of saints have thus beheld him  and have 
relived with him various events of his life. 
Jesus can reincarnate again at any time, in the physical 
body or in the inner light,  according  to your devotion  and 
power of concentration. Reincarnation is forced upon most of 
humanity, but because Jesus has freed himself he can come or 
not, as he wishes. He can appear to you in flesh and blood right 
now if you have that complete devotion which is necessary to 
* John 8:28.  t John  10:34.  t Revelation  3:12.  § Luke  12:6. 

WILL JESUS REINCARNATE AGAINf 
233 
attract him; but he will not come so long as your devotion is 
even one percent less than that. 
Years ago, when I was living and teaching in Boston, I once 
became so busy that I forgot God for three days. The thought 
of continuing like that was intolerable; I was preparing to pack 
up everything and leave America. But just then a student of 
this path came by and asked to meditate with me. As we sat 
there in meditation I began to pray: "Lord, I love Your work 
here in America, but I love You more than the work, and if I 
am going to forget You in this country I will leave." Inwardly 
I heard the voice of God: "What do you want?" 
Impulsively I said, "I would like to see Krishna and Christ 
with all their disciples." Instantly I beheld them, on a sea of 
gold, just as clearly as I am seeing you,- and I worshipped them. 
But in a little while my mind began to doubt. "This is not 
real," I thought. So I prayed again: "Lord, if the vision is true, 
let the other devotee in this room also see it." My friend sud-
denly cried out, "Oh! Krishna and Christ, on a sea of gold!" 
Then a new doubt arose: was it only thought transference? 
But even as this idea crossed my mind, the voice of God said: 
"When I leave, the room will become filled with the fragrance 
of the lotus, and whoever comes shall notice it." Each person 
who later visited me in that room unfailingly asked, "What is 
this strange fragrance of flowers that I smell?" 
For most of his followers Christ exists as an ideal person-
age they have read about in the Bible. But to me he is much 
more than that. He is real. Once,  eight years ago, he  came 
alone and meditated with me all night long. During that time 
I saw a vision of the Hermitage.* Many other times I have seen 
him in visions, and talked with him. And that same Christ you 
too can see. 
You must be prepared to give up everything for commu-
nion with God. He will test you. When you pray and pray and 
meditate and still you don't see Him, but say, "Lord, it doesn't 
matter, You know that I am praying and I am not going to stop 
* This talk was given in 1939; the Hermitage in Encinitas was built in 1936. 
Here Paramahansaji tells us that he saw the Hermitage in a vision in 1931. 
(Publisher's  Note) 

MAN'S ETERNAL QUEST 
234 
until You come"—then  He will respond. One saint said,  "I 
don't care when He comes—I know He will  come." That is the 
attitude one must have. 
When you make up your mind to work to attain the Christ 
consciousness that Jesus had, God will help you to fulfill that 
desire. But first you must attain self-mastery, even as Jesus did. 
God does not bestow great spiritual powers on devotees until 
they show Him they have conquered their human weaknesses. 
Otherwise they might hurt other persons, even destroy whole 
nations, by misuse of the divine might. 
Jesus had sovereign power,- he could easily have saved him-
self from crucifixion, but during the agony in the Garden he 
only said, "Father, not my will, but thine, be done,"*  and on 
the Cross, "Father, forgive them; for they know not what they 
do."+ In those final tests he showed he had wholly conquered 
all ego-impulses. When you have unlimited power, as Jesus did, 
and when everyone spurns you and still you do not  retaliate, 
you are a conqueror indeed. 
All Great Avatars Will Come Again 
Every saint who has come on earth has contributed toward 
the fulfillment of God's desire for the spiritual upliftment of all 
His human children. The great ones come with two purposes: 
to inspire and enlighten a certain number or a large mass of 
people,- and to train real disciples, those who pattern their lives 
after the master's. The latter are the members of the saint's 
true "family," constituting an inner group in whom he plants 
his spiritual life. Jesus had twelve such disciples—and others 
too—but one of the twelve betrayed his love and trust.  The 
most difficult task for every God-ordained spiritual teacher is 
to  produce  others  like  himself,  but  Jesus  made  genuinely 
Christlike disciples. 
Every spiritually enlightened teacher tries to enable many 
devotees to commune with God. Yet each great master never-
theless leaves some "unfinished symphony." Because it re-
mains unfinished, that teacher has to come back again; but the 
time depends on God's will. What I am telling you is not in 
any book, nor is it anyone else's idea; but it is true. 
* Luke  22:42.  t Luke  23:34. 

WILL JESUS REINCARNATE AGAINf  235 
Jesus often healed others, but they didn't always appreci-
ate it. And he tired of healing their physical ills; he wanted 
men to know God. He sought only their highest good, but they 
crucified him  and so not all of his desire for their  spiritual 
;
development was fulfilled. That is why he has to come back 
again. Great ones such as he return to earth to take more souls 
to God. Even though they have attained their own perfection, 
their desire for others' happiness and perfection has not been 
fulfilled. They want to bring their lost brothers back to God. 
When you pray to Jesus he feels your prayer. Free souls 
such as Jesus are aware of the calls of their devotees. You may 
not know they are receiving the vibrations of your feelings, but 
they are. And when your loving demand is very strong,  the 
great ones come to you. 
Their desire is to redeem the whole earth, because every 
saint of God-realization knows there is no death for him. He is 
living in that Eternal Joy. Yet such  saints are aware of  the 
world's grief. They say to the Heavenly Father,  "People are 
killing one another and suffering in many other ways. Why 
must this be?" And God says: "I will send you back sometime 
to help them." 
The God-ordained saviours of mankind have to return to 
earth again, but when they will come, no one can say. Thus 
many people believe in Christ's second coming; but when it 
may happen depends on the will of God. The great ones come 
only with  the permission  of the Heavenly  Father. In  some 
cases, when the time is set, the prophets speak of it; but other 
avatars  come unannounced. Just the same, they come. I too 
wish to come, again and again. 
I want to ply my boat, many times, 
Across the gulf-after-death, 
And return to earth's shores from my home in Heaven. 
I want to load my boat 
With those waiting, thirsty ones who are left behind, 
And carry them by the opal pool of iridescent joy 
Where my Father distributes 
His all-desire-quenching liquid peace. * 
* From Paramahansa Yogananda's poem, God's  Boatman. 

236  MAN'S ETERNAL QUEST 
It will be a wonderful thing to come to help all, and that 
is the way everyone should want to live on this earth. Why 
seek selfish gain? If we are known to God, we beome known 
to His children, for in God we are all one. It is so important 
that we find Him! For our own sake we must know His love 
and be immersed in Him—night and day one continuous joy, 
unending happiness. 
Great souls will reincarnate again. God gave them indi-
viduality and a divine role to play for Him. They have to do 
their work because they love God. They will come,  because 
there are hosts of brothers in this world who are stumbling in 
the mud of delusion and suffering. The great ones have to come 
again, as Jesus too will come again, to take more souls to the 
kingdom of Heaven. 

The Dream Nature of the World 
Self-Realization Fellowship International Headquarters, 
Los Angeles, California, December 23, 1937 
It is only when we wake from dreams that we know we 
have been dreaming. Similarly, this life may be realized as a 
dream only when we awake in Cosmic Consciousness. 
During waking consciousness, the thought of a beautiful 
landscape  does  not  carry  with  it  an  immediate  power  of 
materialization.  But in sleep we have a heightened  creative 
power of visualization and manifestation,- our thoughts swiftly 
erect  the various  structures  of a dream.  The projection  of 
dream images requires both thought and energy, just as the 
projection of moving pictures requires both film and the electrical 
energy of light. 
In sleep, life energy is released from various bodily de-
mands and retires to the brain cells, in which are stored the 
thought films of all past experiences. The enlivening action of 
the energy on the stored-up thought films in the subconscious 
mind results in the projection of the mental motion pictures 
we call dreams. Dreams are actually lessons in the working of 
Cosmic Consciousness. They come to man for a reason,- their 
purpose is to awaken in him a realization of the dream nature 
of the universe and of the method of its operation. 
The sages of India since ancient times have spoken of the 
universe as a materialization of the thought of God. It is easy 
to  say,  of  course,  that  this  universe  is  a  dream.  But  the 
verisimilitude of "life" in our everyday experiences makes it 
nearly impossible for us to believe that the world is nothing 
more than a cosmic dream. It is necessary that we first develop 
mind power in order to be able to realize that the universe is 
actually made out of the thought of God and that, like a dream, 
it is structurally evanescent. 
237 

238  MAN'S ETERNAL QUEST 
We know that thoughts are invisible. But in  dreamland 
they may be made visible by the force of energy. So originally 
this whole universe—in  the form of God's  thoughts—was 
invisible, hidden within the cosmic stream of consciousness. 
Only when those thoughts were crystallized by God's cosmic 
intelligent vibration, or energy, did they become visible to us 
as the material universe. 
So, although it is difficult to realize that this cosmic dream 
universe is merely a dream, we should endeavour to  think 
along this line. Many practical benefits will come to us from 
such a true understanding of the physical world. 
To illustrate, let us say that a sleeping man dreams he is 
a great and powerful warrior; that he goes to war, is shot, and 
lies dying, fust as he is feeling very sad, he suddenly wakes up. 
He laughs at his dream fears as he realizes he is not really a 
warrior, nor is he dying. 
In "real" life one may have the same kind of experience. A 
soldier who goes to war and is mortally wounded  suddenly 
wakes up in the astral world and realizes that the war experi-
ence was all a bad dream—that he has neither broken bones 
nor a physical body. Nevertheless, he is still conscious of life 
and of his individuality. 
In order to realize that all the happenings of this world are 
dream  experiences,  we  should  learn  how  to  visualize  our 
thoughts—how to recharge them with the energy of concen-
tration until they become visible manifestations.  Proper vi-
sualization by the exercise of concentration and will power 
enables us to materialize thoughts, not only as dreams or visions 
in the mental realm, but also as experiences in the material 
realm. 
Matter Originates in Thought 
Starting with the power of his creative imagination,  man 
has built wonderful scientific devices and a marvellous mater-
ial civilization. Inventions are the result of the materialization 
of human thought. Many people try to achieve something in 
the realm of thought, but they give up when difficulties arise. 
Only those persons who have visualized their thought  very 
strongly have been able to manifest them in outward form. 

THE DREAM NATURE OF THE WORLD  239 
Everything on earth had its birth in the factory of the mind— 
either in God's mind or in man's mind. Actually, man cannot 
think  an  "original"  thought.  He  can  only  borrow  God's 
thoughts and become an instrument to materialize them. 
Experiment with your thoughts. Try out your strongest 
thoughts on your body. See if you cannot overcome undesirable 
habits and persistent ailments. When you are successful you 
may apply your thought to make changes in the world around 
you. 
The  relationship  between  thought  and matter is  very 
subtle. Suppose you see a wooden pillar, and try, by the power 
of thought, to remove the pillar. You cannot do that. In spite of 
what you think, the pillar is still there. It is a materialization 
of someone's previous thought. It will not go away merely by 
your thinking it is not there. Only when you realize  it as a 
materialization of thought may you dematerialize it to your 
consciousness. As you learn by experimenting with overcoming 
habits, pain, and so on, you will begin to understand that the 
entire design of the body and all its processes are controlled by 
thought. 
One  may gather great wisdom  by cultivating  the  con-
sciousness that this world and everything in it is only a dream. 
First of all, do not take your earth experiences too seriously. 
The root-cause of sorrow is in viewing the passing show with 
emotional involvement. If you continually think to yourself, "I 
haven't lived as I ought to have lived," you only make yourself 
miserable. Rather, do your best to be better; and no  matter 
what difficulties come, ever affirm, "It is all a dream. It will 
soon pass." Then no trouble can be a great trial to you. No 
happenings of this earth can in any way torture you. 
The consciousness of pain also has to be overcome if you 
are to know that the world is only a dream. When I was a 
child I was hurt frequently when playing football, and when-
ever I dreamed of playing football I always dreamed that I was 
hurt. That fear-thought of being hurt had become rooted in 
my subconscious mind, so that I suffered dream injuries even 
in sleep! 
So one should not take his troubles too seriously, lest they 
darken the subconscious mind. Difficulties come to us in order 

MAN'S ETERNAL QUEST 
240 
to awaken us to the realization that this life is a dream. This 
lesson we all have to learn. Then  we can understand  why 
there is so much difference in everything in the world: some 
people are poor, some are rich; some are healthy and some are 
sick. Although it may seem to be a terrible and cruel game, the 
justification of the complications of life is that all of it is only 
a dream. Take it as such. 
Think of the many aspirations and hopes you entertained 
as a child and as a youth. They have gradually left you, but do 
not be discouraged; always believe that, whatever is coming, it 
will simply be another scene in the dream movie of God that is 
being shown in the playhouse of our minds. We have to behold 
dream tragedies and dream comedies that we may be variously 
entertained. If you can go to a movie and see a picture of war 
and suffering, and afterward say, "What a wonderful picture!" 
so may you take this life as a cosmic picture-show. Be prepared 
for every kind of experience that may come to you, realizing 
that all are but dreams. 
Each human life constitutes a drama; and the events of 
each day represent a drama. You are living a fresh one each of 
the year's 365 days. The thought that you are merely a player 
in these dramas is very comforting. Realize that the acting out 
of whatever part you are called upon to play does not  affect 
your real being. At the end of every earthly incarnation you are 
the same—the immortal soul—untouched by sickness,  sor-
row, or death. "The man who is calm and even-minded during 
pain and pleasure, the one whom these cannot ruffle, he alone 
is fit to attain everlastingness."* 
Pride Is the Greatest Barrier to Wisdom 
The experiences of my life have intensified my conviction 
that human pride is the greatest barrier to wisdom. Egotistical 
pride must go. It is a blind that prevents our seeing God as the 
sole Doer, the Director of the Cosmic Drama. You are playing 
different parts in this cosmic movie-house, and you may not 
foresee  what  part  will  be  assigned  to  you  tomorrow.  You 
should be prepared for anything. Such is the law of life. Why 
sorrow, then, over life's experiences? If you take every happening 
* Bhagavad Gita 11:15. 

THE DREAM NATURE OF THE WORLD  241 
as you would if you were seeing someone else playing it in a 
motion picture, you will not grieve. Play your 365 roles each 
year with an inward smile and with the remembrance that you 
are only dreaming. Then you will never again be hurt by life. 
You have played many roles through many  incarnations. 
But they were all given to entertain you—not to frighten you. 
Your immortal soul cannot be touched. In the motion picture 
of life you may cry, you may laugh, you may play many parts; 
but inwardly you should ever say, "I am Spirit." Great conso-
lation comes from realization of that wisdom. 
You cannot expect to wake up from the delusion that earth 
life is real merely by running away into the forest. You have to 
play out to the end the part that is given you. Each  human 
being is contributing to the enactment of the motion picture of 
the cosmos. If you want to be happy you should play out your 
part with  dignity, assurance,  and happiness. When you are 
awake in God He will show you that you are unchanged, even 
though you have played countless parts in His earth drama. 
Dissociate Yourself from Your Experiences 
Think of it! Of the fifteen hundred million people who 
have died every hundred years, each one has played a definite 
part in this cosmic motion picture. In fact, each human being 
has played in addition a separate "home movie," his own pri-
vate motion picture. If you were to multiply all the motion-
picture lives portrayed by those millions of beings, you wouldn't 
be able to count them. But this show has a purpose: that you 
learn how to play the various parts of the life movie without 
identifying your Self with your role. It is important to avoid 
identification with pain or anger or any kind of mental or phys-
ical suffering that comes. The best way to dissociate yourself 
from your difficulty is to be mentally detached, as if you were 
merely a spectator, while at the same time seeking a remedy. 
Don't expect to attain unalloyed peace and happiness from 
earthly life. This should be your new attitude: no matter what 
your experiences are, enjoy them in an objective way, as you 
would a movie. You have to find true peace and happiness 
within yourself. Your outer experiences should be only fun. You 
can convert all of them into miserable ones if you allow your 

242  MAN'S ETERNAL QUEST 
mind to do so. You may have good health and not appreciate 
it at all. But if you become unwell, then you will appreciate 
what it is to have health. Show gratitude to God for what He 
bestows on you, without waiting for reverses to make  you 
grateful. 
You are a child immortal. You have come on earth to en-
tertain and to be entertained. This is why life should be a 
combination of both meditation and activity. If you lose your 
inner balance, that is just the time when you are vulnerable to 
worldly suffering. Don't disgrace the name of God, the One in 
whose image you are made. Awaken the innate fortitude of the 
mind by affirming, "No matter what experiences come,  they 
cannot touch me. I am always happy." 
When I look back and compare, I find that life was much 
simpler at the time we started our first hermitage (in a little 
mud hut in India that we had rented for one rupee) than it is 
now, when we have the responsibility of maintaining this large 
institution. Yet I preserve my mental balance no matter what 
trials come. Learn to laugh at difficulties by remembering that 
you are immortal: "Killed many times, I yet live,- born many 
times, I am yet changeless." Whether you are suffering in this 
life, or smiling with opulence and power, your consciousness 
should remain unchanged. If you can accomplish evenminded-
ness, nothing can ever hurt you. The lives of all great masters 
show that they have achieved this blessed state. 
In order to be able to say with realization that all things 
are in the mind, you must first develop an inner consciousness 
of divine peace that remains unruffled by the experiences of 
this earth. Accept them as you would dreams; and the  time 
will come when you will find that, just by the power of your 
strong thought, whatever you think will materialize. This is 
very difficult to do, but it can be done. 
A scientist must busy himself with going through several 
experiments in order to arrive at one fact. But the spiritually 
developed  man  is  able  to  perceive  the  fact  without  going 
through a physical process. If you first become one with God, 
then whatever you think can be materialized. This truth was 
demonstrated many times by Jesus. He had realized his unity 
with God. 

THE DREAM NATURE OF THE WORLD  243 
Concentrate First on God 
One's first concentration should be on union with  God. 
Every day as you go through various earthly situations,  men-
tally practise your oneness with God. If a pain comes along to 
disturb that consciousness you should reason, "Well, if I were 
asleep I wouldn't feel this pain,- why should I be aware of it 
now? All experiences are fleeting dreams." Practise overcoming 
all trials in this manner. 
The first state of concentration is to be able to see in your 
mind's eye anything that you wish. For example, I can keep 
looking at this room and concentrating upon it until, when I 
close my eyes, I can still see the room exactly as it is. This is 
the first step in deep concentration, but most people haven't 
the patience to practise it. I had the patience. 
As you continue to practise visualization you will find that 
your thoughts become materialized. The cosmic law will so 
arrange it that whatsoever you are thinking of will be produced 
in actuality, if you command it to be so. 
Suppose I am thinking of an apple, and the apple appears in 
my hand. That would be a demonstration of the highest power 
of concentration. The great ones can materialize anything right 
before your eyes, as did Babaji when he materialized a palace at 
the time of Lahiri Mahasaya's initiation in the  Himalayas.* 
That was an expression of the power of concentration in its 
highest form. Nothing worthwhile may be gained  without 
effort and without  concentration. 
* See Autobiography  of a Yogi, chapter 34. Nikola Tesla, renowned electrical 
scientist and inventor, understood the possibility of direct materialization. He 
wrote: 
"Long ago he (man) recognized that all perceptible matter comes from a 
primary substance, or a tenuity beyond conception, filling all space, the Akasa 
or luminiferous ether, which is acted upon by the life-giving Prana, or creative 
force, calling into existence, in never-ending cycles, all things and phenomena. 
"Can man control this grandest, most awe-inspiring of all processes in 
nature? Can he harness her inexhaustible energies to perform all their func-
tions at his bidding, more still cause them to operate simply by the force of his 
will? 
"If he could do this, he would have powers almost unlimited and super-
natural. At his command, with but a slight effort on his part, old worlds 
would disappear and new ones of his planning would spring into being. He 

244  MAN'S ETERNAL QUEST 
Don't be sensitive about the body and material  concerns, 
nor let anyone hurt you. Keep your consciousness aloof. Give 
goodwill to all, but develop a state of consciousness wherein no-
body can ruffle you. Try to make others happy every day. Share 
your wisdom with others. Do not permit yourself to lose inter-
est in life. Learn everything about one thing, and something 
about everything. Realize that the more you seek, the more you 
will find; the realms of thought are infinite. The moment you 
think you have attained everything, you have  circumscribed 
yourself. Search on and on, continuously, and in the valley of 
your humbleness will gather the ocean of God's wisdom. 
The greatest thing you can do to cultivate true wisdom is 
to practise the consciousness of the world as a dream. If fail-
ure comes, say, "It is a dream." Then shut off the thought of 
failure from your mind. In the midst of negative  conditions, 
practise  "opposition"  by thinking and acting in a positive, 
constructive way. Practise titiksha,  which means not to give 
in to unpleasant experiences, but to resist them without be-
coming upset mentally. When sickness comes, follow hygienic 
laws of living, without permitting your mind to be disturbed. 
Be unruffled in everything you do. If you try hard to cultivate 
the  dream-opposite  of  whatever  trials  you  may  be  going 
through, you will be able to change a nightmarish  situation 
into a beautiful experience. This freedom of mind will  come 
when you realize that solids, liquids, and all other forms of 
matter are expressions of God's thought. 
The best way to find true freedom is to meditate deeply. 
You can learn how to meditate by studying the truths in the 
Self-Realization Fellowship [Yogoda Satsanga Society] Lessons. 
could fix, solidify, and preserve the ethereal shapes of his imagining, the fleet-
ing visions of his dreamas. He could express all the creations of his mind on 
any scale, in forms concerete and imperishable. 
"To create and to annihilate material substance, cause it to aggregate in 
forms according to his desire, would be the supreme manifestation of the 
power of Man's mind, his most complete triumph over the physical world, 
his crowning achievement, which would place him beside his Creator, make 
him fulfill his ultimate destiny." —Copyright 1944 by J.J. O'Neill. From the 
book, Prodigal Genius,  published by Ives Washburn Inc. Reprinted with per-
mission of the David McKay Company Inc., New York. 

THE DREAM NATURE OF THE WORLD  245 
No one else can convey to you the taste of sugar; you have to 
taste it yourself. 
Yesterday I was sitting in my room, looking back over my 
life, and I realized that everything in the outer world that had 
promised great happiness had deceived me; but one thing has 
never deceived me—my inner peace. Indescribable billows of 
happiness surge over my soul. As I passed through various ex-
periences over the years, that unchanging inner peace has been 
proof to me of the existence of God. 
I was just thinking this when suddenly I saw a great Light. 
Everything else vanished. There was feeling—that was all. My 
hand was not a hand, but a feeling. When I touched my hands to-
gether there was no flesh there, only feeling. Then I understood 
that I had become thoughts,- everything around me, the light and 
the room and the weight of the body—all were nothing but 
thoughts. 
It was a delightful experience. Gone were the sorrow and 
sadness I had felt for things past, and in their place a great sense 
of freedom. 
That consciousness of God-peace is never-ending. It is the 
only  real  state of happiness.  Everything  else will  fail  you. 
Nothing else can make you happy because only the joy of His 
presence is real. 
It is not  necessary  to go through  every kind of  human 
experience in order to attain this ultimate wisdom. You should 
be able to learn by studying the lives of others. Why become 
helplessly involved in an endless panorama of events in order to 
discover that nothing in this world can ever make you happy? 
One  may  learn  the  truth  in  two  ways:  by  undergoing 
many good and bad experiences,  or by cultivating  wisdom. 
Choose which you prefer. Krishna said: "The attainment  of 
wisdom immediately bestows supreme peace."*  Jesus  said: 
"Seek ye first the kingdom of God."t If you are seeking some-
thing else first, you will surely be disillusioned. Each  man 
rationalizes,  "Well, others have been deceived, but I won't 
be." Nevertheless, he will be deceived. The only  experience 
that  is real,  the  only  experience  that  brings  happiness,  is 
awareness of the presence of God. 
* Bhagavad Gita IV:39.  t Metthew  6:33. 

God's Nature in the Mother 
and the Father 
PART ONE: THE MOTHER 
Self-Realization Fellowship Temple, San Diego, California, 
Mother's Day, May 11, 1941 
Today let us hold a grateful thought for all good mothers 
who have nurtured their children with affection. If children 
would reflect on the love shown them by the mother,  they 
would feel a desire to give similar affection to all the children 
of the world. May all sons and daughters who have been nur-
tured by a mother's love be themselves filled with a mother's 
affection, which is unconditional love, and express it toward 
others. Thus shall they solace the world with peace and bring 
heaven on earth. 
The  mother's  love  is not  given  to  us to  spoil us  with 
indulgence, but to soften our hearts, that we may in turn soften 
others with kindness, and free struggling souls from the hard 
knots of bondage to the world. Those who are helplessly shack-
led by sin and dire difficulties need our tenderness and love. 
My sincere and complete devotion to my earthly mother 
was the first cause of my love for the Divine Mother. Thus it 
was my great love for my mother that led to my illumination. 
In India we like to speak of God as Mother Divine, because 
a true mother is more tender and forgiving than a father. The 
mother is an expression  of the unconditional  love of  God. 
Mothers were created by God to show us that He loves us with 
or without cause. Every woman is to me a representative of the 
Mother. I see the Cosmic Mother in all. That which I find most 
admirable in woman is her mother love. Those who think of 
woman as an object of lust perish in that fire; but those who 
look upon all women as incarnations of the Mother Divine find 
246 

GOD'S NATURE IN THE MOTHER AND THE FATHER  247 
in them a sacredness that is inviolable. When you can see every 
woman as your mother, as some of our God-realized masters 
in India did, universal love comes into your heart. 
Certain sceptical followers of a great saint wanted to test 
him, and sent to him some beautiful prostitutes. He quickly 
jumped up and cried: "Mother Divine, in these forms You have 
come to me. I bow to you all." The women knelt before him 
and were ashamed. From that moment they were spiritually 
changed. 
Every man who looks upon woman as an incarnation of 
the Immortal Mother will find salvation. A husband should see 
in his wife the pure beauty of the Mother Divine. Looking upon 
the wife as the Mother, he will find in her a holy essence not 
discerned before. 
Mothers would not be able to love their children if God 
hadn't implanted that love in them. Yet credit belongs to the 
instrument  also,  because  the  flood  of  divine  love  passes 
through the human mother. All the great masters have shown 
honour to their mothers. Swami Shankara, * after the death of 
his mother, disregarded the monastic injunctions against per-
forming ceremonial family rites and cremated her body in a 
divine flame that he caused to emanate form his hand. 
A home is made gracious by the presence of the Divine 
Mother in the form of the human mother. Isn't that a thought 
to remember? Do not forget it. Love for the Mother must be 
constantly cultivated in your heart, so that whenever you see 
a woman, you behold her as your mother. If you look upon 
woman without lust of the eyes, you will be able to draw from 
her store of spiritual treasures. 
Why was the mother given such love? That she might love 
her child unconditionally.  Loving one's own child is only a 
practice of the love divine. The mother thinks it is her own 
child, but it is the child of God. The child will be taken away 
as soon as the Divine  Spirit  calls.  So every mother  should 
extend that love she feels for her child unto all the children of 
the earth. 
* Lord Shankara's Prayer to the Divine Mother for Forgiveness  of Sins bears 
the refrain: "Though bad sons are many, never has there been a bad mother." 

248  MAN'S ETERNAL QUEST 
A mother is expected to look after her son, and a son is 
told to honour his mother; but I say that a son should not only 
love his mother but should look on all women as expressions 
of the Divine Mother. 
Each mother should remember that the divine uncondi-
tional love is passing through her and she is blessed. She should 
realize that it is not her own love she gives, but the love of the 
Mother Divine in her. She should be proud of her children, but 
should not limit herself by bestowing love only on her own 
sons and daughters. A mother should give divine unconditional 
love to all. This is my message for you today. 
Mothers, be proud that the Divine Mother took your form 
to give love tangibly to the world, not only to your children but 
unto all children of the earth. Then you will be really blessed; 
and instead of thinking that you have one child, or five chil-
dren,  you will  realize,  "I  have  many  children  all  over  the 
earth." In that awareness you are one with the Divine Mother. 
The mother who looks upon all God's children as her own 
is no longer a mortal mother. She becomes the Mother Immor-
tal. This is what all women saints are. One day they realize: 
"The great love that I feel for my child I now feel for all. Now 
I know that I am not this body, but an expression of the Cosmic 
Mother." Think what you can do! From an ordinary woman to 
Divine Mother! And why not? The Universal Mother made you 
in Her image and you should manifest that image by bestowing 
on all beings Her illimitable love. 
PART TWO: THE FATHER 
Self-Realization Fellowship Temple, Hollywood, California, 
Father's Day, June 18,1944 
On this Father's Day we affirm our fealty to the Heavenly 
Father. While the human father's love is not always uncondi-
tional, still his love is guided by wisdom, regard for law, and 
the will to protect others. The Divine Father of wisdom, law, 
and protection, who is represented in all good human fathers, 
we honour today. 

GOD'S NATURE IN THE MOTHER AND THE FATHER  249 
A father should remember he is not just a human parent; 
he is a representative of the Heavenly Father. To that Cosmic 
Father I pay tribute. It is He who is behind all fathers.  Each 
father should therefore realize that he has a responsibility to 
behave properly, for the transparent light of Spirit cannot flow 
through him if his mind is darkened with delusion and erro-
neous thoughts. He must keep himself pure, for it is through 
him and through all other fathers that the Heavenly  Father 
looks after the children of earth. 
A human father's body and mind ought to be a temple of 
the Divine Father. As an instrument of the Divine Being, the 
father plays his greatest creative role when he implants in his 
children thoughts that will lead to God-realization. 
To produce offspring is not a unique accomplishment; the 
animals do that. But to produce children on the plane of divine 
love and in a spiritual consciousness is an important achieve-
ment. Even animals may be bred to order; yet many  human 
children are born out of passion and accident,  emotion  and 
evil. How can they be pure and perfect? The perpetrators of 
thefts and other crimes are usually children who were born 
out of passion, although sometimes there is a good soul here 
and there. 
Example Is the Best Teacher 
Character  building  should  be  taught  in  schools  and 
colleges,  but  fathers  should  realize  that  example  is  more 
important than schooling. One should not tell his  children, 
"Do not do as I do, but do as I say." If you do not want a child 
to smoke, you yourself should not smoke. If you want a child 
to be mild and noble of speech, you should not talk to your 
wife impatiently, because the child notices your example. Be 
kind in word and thought because it is the Heavenly  Father 
who has taken your form to look after the child. 
Let every father remember, when tempted to speak to a 
child with dictatorial harshness, "Because my voice is meant 
to be used by the Cosmic Father, I should never allow Satan, 
the father of ignorance, to speak through me with mean, un-
reasoning sternness. I should always guide my children with 
the  loving  persuasiveness  of truth.  My  mind  should  be a 

250  MAN'S ETERNAL QUEST 
transparent glass through which shines the Heavenly Father's 
light of wisdom." 
We should use the wisdom of the Father-God and the love 
of the Mother-God to bring peace on earth. A good father could 
never bring himself to kill his children; and if all fathers filled 
their hearts with the love of the Divine Father, who cares for 
His children of all nations, how could there be any war? Love 
is the spiritual weapon with which to end all war. 
To the Lord I have dedicated my voice, my eyes, my hands, 
my feet, my heart, my body, my feelings, my will—my being. 
I say to all fathers: "When you destroy the ego, you will real-
ize the protecting nature and wisdom of the Heavenly Father 
working through you." 

Looking at  Creation 
with Seeing Eyes 
Self-Realization Fellowship International Headquarters, 
Los Angeles, California, August 17, 1939 
Marvellous indeed is the Lord's universe. Within it He is 
working all His wonders of creation. Do not be a walking "dead 
man" in this world; observe, analyse, and appreciate what God 
and His agent, man, have wrought here. How intricate is the 
universal mechanism! Reflect on the way we are made, and in 
what orderly fashion the whole machinery of creation  runs 
according to cosmic law. 
We all see the flowers and enjoy their beauty, but  who 
knows what is causing the flowers? Anything one uses or sees 
every  day—be  it  a handkerchief,  a musical  instrument,  a 
house,  or a tree—he  should  question  and ponder by  what 
means,  of what  substance,  it  is  made.  Cars  are  taken  for 
granted; but if you were to visit the factories in which they are 
produced, you would realize how complicated automobiles are. 
Consider too what went into making the paper for the daily 
news, and the intricate machinery that imprints it—no human 
hand could operate so fast. 
And if the creation of everyday man-made objects can be 
so  complex,  how  vastly  more  complicated  the  creation  of 
plants, animals, and human beings! It takes ten years' study of 
medical science to understand the composition, functions, and 
requirements of the seemingly simple human body. Even a ca-
sual analysis reveals much to wonder at—though I sometimes 
think God could have made a few improvements! 
When a plant is growing in water in a glass jar, one can see 
that its roots are like hairs. Through the God-given intelligent 
energy in the roots the plant draws from soil and water the food 
251 

252  MAN'S ETERNAL QUEST 
it requires for growth. Like an upturned plant, man similarly 
absorbs though his hair electric currents helpful to the body. * 
Is it not amazing that the sap which feeds the leaves of the 
plant flows upward against the pull of gravity? When the skin 
of the plant is removed, one can see the intricate network of 
tubes that channel this sap. That which carries on this process 
of sustenance and growth is the mystery called life. When I am 
in the ecstasy of God-consciousness, I behold this life in even 
a blade of grass. Little did I dream that I would be able to see 
such hidden marvels of creation! To concentrate on these mar-
vels is to stand in awe of what the Lord has done. 
With calculated precision God has ordained the structural 
form of each living thing, and the requirements for maintaining 
that form in good working order. If there is any deficiency in 
those requirements—food, for example—plants, animals, and 
human beings suffer. The average person draws from his food 
all the various chemical elements his body needs; but there are 
many dietary transgressors whose meals do not contain all the 
required elements, or the correct balance of them. Improper 
nourishment is one of the main causes of all sickness in man. 
The effects of dietary deficiency can be seen almost  immedi-
ately in a plant when some necessary chemical is omitted from 
its food. 
There are vital exchanges between man and all other liv-
ing things. For aeons India has had the custom of cremation 
and scattering the ashes of the dead. In this and other ways 
man feeds Mother Earth, and her plants in turn feed man. 
The reciprocity between man and trees is well known. Man 
inhales oxygen and exhales carbon dioxide.t Trees absorb and 
* "The physical body, with roots of hair, cerebrospinal trunk, nerve branches, 
and boughs of hands and feet, bears a resemblance to an inverted tree....Some 
yogis do not cut their hair but keep it long, to draw from the ether a greater 
quantity of cosmic rays. The reason for Samson's having lost this superhuman 
strength when his hair was shorn by Delilah may well be that he had prac-
tised certain yogic exercises that transform one's hair into sensitive antennae 
to draw cosmic energy from the ether." —Paramahansa Yogananda,  Self-
Realization  magazine, May-June  1963. 
t An excess of carbon dioxide is poisonous to the body. However, a small 
amount of carbon dioxide is retained in the blood, and is vital to life as a reg-
ulator of the bodily chemistry. (Publisher's  Note) 

LOOKING  AT CREATION  WITH SEEING  EYES  253 
store carbon dioxide and water, which they break down by pho-
tosynthesis to create carbohydrates (food). In the process they 
give off oxygen, essential to man.*  Photosynthesis, being de-
pendent on sunlight, stops at night. However, through another 
process called respiration, trees continuously release carbon 
dioxide into the atmosphere, particularly at night when the 
counteracting influence of carbon-absorbing, oxygen-producing 
photosynthesis is not present. As night air is usually still, the 
heavy carbon dioxide gas settles near the ground. In part for this 
reason, the custom of sleeping on beds—that is, above ground 
level—came about. 
The Limitations of the Physical Senses 
Science has taught us a great deal about the intricate mech-
anisms of our universe and about the substance of which we are 
all made, but there is still vast knowledge to be uncovered. We 
could perceive more and appreciate more if we developed the 
underlying powers of our sensory organs. Things we should see 
with our eyes we do not see, things we should hear with our 
ears we do not hear, because our senses are too habituated, too 
attached, to experiences of the limited gross physical world. 
Freedom from that attachment  is not negation of  sensory 
enjoyment; it permits a broadening of the God-given sensory 
powers to their fullest spiritual potential. 
On the material plane man has discovered various ways to 
increase his seeing power. The unaided physical eye receives 
only limited impressions of colour. However, under ultraviolet 
light, drab-looking pieces of rock in which certain minerals are 
present will show forth luminescent colours. Remove the ul-
traviolet light and the rocks assume their original dull hue. 
Many colours in the physical world, such as the blue of the 
sky, are really optical illusions caused by the reflection of light 
on various kinds of particles. Because your eyes register only a 
limited degree of the creative vibration that makes up every-
thing in creation, you do not see the subtle astralt  colours, 
* "It is quite probable that our entire supply of free oxygen, one-fifth of the 
atmosphere, has been furnished by photosynthesis." —Encyclopaedia Britannica. 
t Within every physical being and object and vibration is its finer astral coun-
terpart, composed of luminous lifetronic energy. 

254  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
which are hidden in everything around you. Could you but see, 
you would be amazed at their beauty. Even the most gorgeous 
shades on earth appear ugly, gross, and wild in comparison to 
the magnificent hues of the astral world. 
So neither your eyes nor your ears register everything pos-
sible. You cannot smell astral fragrances, nor perceive with 
your other physical sense organs the myriad finer forms and 
impressions passing through the ether. Even if St. Francis were 
here at this moment in his astral form, you would not be able 
to see and hear and touch him. Yet it is possible to advance 
beyond ordinary sensory limitations, for I have seen him. 
Often man does not cognize even things that his senses 
are able to perceive. Those persons who have perceptive eyes 
enjoy beauty everywhere. Others act as if they had no eyes; 
even in a beautiful place they fail to "see" anything. When I 
visited  Mexico  and  saw  the  "Floating  Gardens"  of  Lake 
Xochimilco, * their loveliness filled my heart with awareness 
of the Divine Artist. Another man, standing nearby, seemed 
equally engrossed. However, something told me he was not 
seeing what I was seeing, so I asked his reaction to the pic-
turesque scene. "I was thinking of how to drain off the water 
and make more land," he replied. An engineer, he was seeing 
the lake in his own way. So we view things according to our 
different mentalities and moods. 
Every soul is encased in a composite vibration of sensa-
tions, thoughts, feelings—all the factors that make up a per-
son's being, or consciousness. Each one has a different com-
position, a different vibration. All the things you have done 
since childhood are stored in tabloid form as tendencies in 
your brain. They make you what you are. Because we do not 
see this tabloid pattern, we wonder why people behave as they 
do. Some become suddenly elated, or inexplicably angry or 
moody,- even they don't know why. Some are always busy crit-
icizing or gossiping about  others,  when  there is plenty  of 
"house-cleaning"  to do in their own "home"! The  invisible 
tabloid tendencies in the brain compel each one to behave in 
certain ways. They bury the soul, preventing the expression of 
* The gardens are now fixed "islands," the plant roots having long since be-
come anchored to the bottom of the lake, which is extremely shallow. 

