SRI SRI PARAMAHANSA YOGANANDA 
(January 5, 1893—March 7,  1952) 

M A N ' S  ETERNAL 
QUEST 
COLLECTED TALKS AND ESSAYS ON 
REALIZING GOD  IN DAILY LIFE, VOLUME I 
BY 
SRI  SRI  PARAMAHANSA  YOGANANDA 
^rCCjoda  iSatAanga  ^Society  ZIndia 
FOUNDE 
* m 

Copyright © 1982 Self-Realization Fellowship 
All rights reserved. Except for brief quotations in book reviews, 
and as otherwise permitted by applicable law, no part of this 
work may be reproduced, stored, transmitted or displayed in 
any form, or by any means (electronic, mechanical, or other-
wise) now known or hereafter devised — including photocopy, 
recording, or any information storage and retrieval system — 
without prior written permission from Self-Realization  Fel-
lowship, Los Angeles, California 90065-3298, U.S.A. 
Third Indian Paperback Edition, 2003 
Second Impression, 2005 
An authorized publication of Yogoda Satsanga 
Society of India/Self-Realization Fellowship 
The trade dress of this book is a trademark of 
Self-Realization Fellowship 
Published in India by 
YOGODA SATSANGA SOCIETY OF INDIA 
Yogoda Satsanga Math 
21, U. N. Mukherjee Road 
Dakshineswar, Kolkata 700 076 
Printed in India by 
Srinivas Fine Arts (P) Ltd. 
118/2, Velayutham Road, 
Sivakasi 626123 
Distributed by: 
f
Oxford & IBH Publishing Co.  | § | ,  p ^ u ^ g  House 
mco
Pvt. Ltd.  x®?' 
Also available at Yogoda Satsanga Society of India ashrams and 
dhyana kendras throughout India. 

Dedicated by Yogoda Satsanga Society of India/ 
Self-Realization Fellowship to our beloved 
Sanghamata and President, 
SRI SRI DAYA MATA 
whose faithful devotion to recording the 
words of her guru for posterity has 
preserved for us and for the ages the 
liberating wisdom and God-love 
of Sri Sri Paramahansa Yogananda 

The Spiritual Legacy of 
Sri Sri Paramahansa Yogananda 
A century after the birth of Paramahansa Yogananda, he has 
come to be recognized as one of the preeminent spiritual figures of 
our time; and the influence of his life and work continues to grow. 
Many of the religious and philosophical concepts and methods he 
introduced decades ago are now finding expression in education, 
psychology, business, medicine, and other spheres of endeavour— 
contributing in far-reaching ways to a more integrated, humane, 
and spiritual vision of human life. 
The fact that Paramahansa Yoganandaji's teachings are being 
interpreted and creatively applied in many different fields, as 
well as by exponents of diverse philosophical and metaphysical 
movements, points not only to the great practical utility of what 
he taught. It also makes clear the need for some means of ensur-
ing that the spiritual legacy he left not be diluted, fragmented, or 
distorted with the passing of time. 
With the increasing variety of sources of information about 
Paramahansa Yogananda, readers sometimes inquire how they can 
be certain that a publication accurately presents his life and teach-
ings. In response to these inquiries, we would like to explain that 
Paramahansaji founded Yogoda Satsanga Society of India/Self-
Realization Fellowship to disseminate his teachings and to pre-
serve  their  purity  and  integrity  for  future  generations.  He 
personally chose and trained those close disciples who head the 
Yogoda Satsanga Society/Self-Realization Fellowship Publications 
Council, and gave them specific guidelines for the preparation and 
publishing of his lectures, writings, and Yogoda Satsanga Lessons. 
The members of the YSS/SRF Publications Council honour these 
guidelines as a sacred trust, in order that the universal message of 
this beloved world teacher may live on in its original power and 
authenticity. 
The  Yogoda  Satsanga  Society  of  India /Self-Realization 
Fellowship name and the YSS/SRF emblem (shown above) were 
originated  by  Paramahansaji  to  identify  the  organization  he 
founded to carry on his worldwide spiritual and humanitarian 
work. These appear on all YSS/SRF books, audio and video record-
ings, films, and other publications, assuring the reader that a work 
originates with the organization founded by Sri Sri Paramahansa 
Yogananda and faithfully conveys his teachings as he himself 
intended they be given. 
YOGODA SATSANGA SOCIETY OF 
INDIA / SELF-REALIZATION FELLOWSHIP 

CONTENTS 
Preface  xi 
Introduction  xiv 
How Seekers First Found God  3 
The Universality of Yoga  13 
The Infinite Nature of God  21 
Answered Prayers  32 
Making Religion Scientific  44 
Understanding the Unreality of Matter  55 
Man's Greatest Adventure  60 
Self-Analysis: Key to the Mastery of Life  73 
Healing by God's Unlimited Power  81 
Eliminating the Static of Fear from the Mind Radio  ....  91 
Nervousness—Cause and Cure  98 
The Physical and Spiritual Rewards of Fasting  102 
Self-realization: Criterion of Religion  108 
The Desire That Satisfies All Desires  121 
In God Is All Happiness  133 
How to Be More Likable  139 
Devoloping Personality  149 
The Divine Art of Making Friends  155 
The True Experience of Spiritual Ecstasy  160 
Three Paths to Cosmic Consciousness  165 
Be a Smile Millionaire  172 
Lord, Possess Us with Thy Love  180 
Controlling Your New Year's Destiny  184 
How to Outwit Temptation  192 
Curing Mental Alcoholics  199 
Overcoming Malignant Moods  203 
Reincarnation Can Be Scientifically Proven  211 
Reincarnation: The Soul's Journey to Perfection  216 
[vii] 

[.viii]  MAN'S ETERNAL QUEST 
Will Jesus Reincarnate Again?  229 
The Dream Nature of the World  237 
God's Nature in the Mother and the Father  246 
Looking at Creation with Seeing Eyes  251 
The Invisible Man  261 
What Are Ghosts?  269 
Jesus: A Christ of East and West  283 
Christ and Krishna: Avatars of the One Truth  294 
The Ten Commandments: Eternal Rules of Happiness . .  308 
How to Read Character  317 
How to Be Happy at Will  324 
Steps Toward the Universal Christ Consciousness  328 
Even-Mindedness in a World of Change  337 
The Balanced Life (Curing Mental Abnormalities)  347 
Increasing the Power of Initiative  353 
Who Made God?  360 
The Missing Link Between Consciousness and Matter . .  364 
Is God a Father or a Mother?  370 
The Art of Developing Memory  380 
Man's Eternal Quest  386 
The Art of Living  399 
Habit—Your Master or Your Slave?  404 
Creating and Destroying Habits at Will  410 
Developing Dynamic Will  420 
Seek God Now!  . . .  431 
Why Waste Time? God Is the Joy You Seek  439 
God as Light and Joy  448 
Have I Found God?  455 
The Purpose of Life Is to Find God  457 
God! God! God! (poem)  463 
Paramahansa Yogananda: A Yogi in Life and Death  464 
Aims and Ideals of Yogoda Satsanga Society of India ....  465 
Glossary  466 

ILLUSTRATIONS 
Cover: Sri Sri Paramahansa Yogananda at Mysore Palace,  1935 
Facing page 
Sri Sri Paramahansa Yogananda  (Frontispiece) 
Paramahansa Yogananda in New York, 1926  14 
Sri Yogananda's yoga classes in three cities  15 
Paramahansa Yogananda, 1926  46 
Mahatma Gandhi and Sri Yogananda  47 
Dedication of SRF Lake Shrine and Gandhi Memorial. . .  47 
Paramahansa Yogananda in the early 1920s  366 
Yoga class in New York City, 1926  367 
Paramahansa Yogananda at the White House, 
Washington, D.C  398 
Sri Yogananda welcoming Ambassador of India, 1952 . . .  398 
Yogoda Satsanga Society of India Sakha Math and 
Ashram, Ranchi, Jharkhand  399 
[ix] 

PREFACE 
(By the Sanghamata and President of 
Yogoda Satsanga Society of India/Self-Realization Fellowship) 
The first time I beheld Sri Sri Paramahansa Yogananda, he 
was speaking before a vast, enraptured audience in Salt Lake 
City. The year was 1931. As I stood at the back of the crowded 
auditorium, I became transfixed, unaware of anything around 
me except the speaker and his words. My whole being was ab-
sorbed in the wisdom and divine love that were pouring into 
my soul and flooding my heart and mind. I could only think, 
"This man loves God as I have always longed to love Him. He 
knows God. Him I shall follow." And from that moment, I did. 
As I felt the transfiguring power of his words on my own life 
during those early days with Paramahansaji, there arose within 
me a feeling of the urgent need to preserve his words for all the 
world, for all time. It became my sacred and joyous privilege, 
during the many years I was with Paramahansa Yogananda, to 
record his lectures and classes, and also many informal  talks 
and words of personal counsel—truly a vast treasure-house of 
wondrous wisdom and God-love. As Gurudeva spoke, the rush 
of his inspiration was often reflected in the swiftness of his 
speech; he might speak without pause for minutes at a time, 
and continue for an hour. While his hearers sat enthralled, my 
pen was flying! As I took down his words in shorthand, it was 
as though a special grace had descended, instantly translating 
the Guru's voice into the shorthand characters on the page. 
Their transcription has been a blessed task that continues  to 
this day. Even after such a long time—some of my notes are 
more than forty years old—when I start to transcribe  them, 
they are miraculously fresh in my mind, as though they had 
been recoreded yesterday. I can even hear inwardly the inflec-
tions of Gurudeva's voice in each particular phrase. 
[xi]  i 

[.xii]  MAN'S ETERNAL QUEST 
The Master seldom made even the slightest preparation for 
his lectures,- if he prepared anything at all, it might consist of a 
factual note or two, hastily jotted down. Very often, while rid-
ing in the car on the way to the temple, he would casually ask 
one of us: "What is my subject today?" He would put his mind 
on it, and then give the lecture extemporaneously from an inner 
reservoir of divine inspiration. 
The subjects for Gurudeva's sermons at the temples were 
set and announced in advance. But sometimes his mind was 
working in an entirely different vein when he began to speak. 
Regardless of the "subject for today," the Master would voice 
the truths engrossing his consciousness at that moment, pour-
ing forth priceless wisdom in a steady stream from the abun-
dance of his own spiritual experience and intuitive perception. 
Nearly always, at the close of such a service, a number of peo-
ple would come forward to thank him for having enlightened 
them on a problem that had been troubling them, or perhaps 
for having explained some philosophical concept in which they 
were parcticularly interested. 
Sometimes, while he was lecturing, the Guru's conscious-
ness would be so uplifted that he would momentarily forget the 
audience and converse directly with God; his whole being would 
be overflowing with divine joy and intoxicating love. In these 
high states of consciousness, his mind completely at one with 
the Divine Consciousness, he inwardly perceived Truth, and de-
scribed what he saw. On occasion, God appeared to him as the 
Divine Mother, or in some other aspect; or one of our great Gu-
rus, or other saints, would manifest in vision before him. At 
such times, even the audience would feel deeply the special 
blessing bestowed on all present. During such a visitation of 
Saint Francis of Assisi, whom Gurudeva deeply loved, the Mas-
ter was inspired to compose the beautiful poem, "God! God! 
God!" 
The Bhagavad Gita describes an enlightened master in these 
words: "The Self shines forth like a sun in those who have ban-
ished ignorance by wisdom" (V:16). One might have been over-
awed by Paramahansa Yogananda's spiritual radiance, were it 
not for his warmth and naturalness, and a quiet humility, which 
put everyone instantly at ease. Each person in the audience felt 

PREFACE  [xiii] 
that Gurudeva's talk was addressed to him personally. Not the 
least of the Master's endearing qualities was his understanding 
sense of humour. By some choice phrase, gesture, or facial ex-
pression he would bring forth an appreciative response of hearty 
laughter at just the right moment to drive home a point, or to 
relax his listeners after long and intense concentatation on a par-
ticularly deep subject. 
One cannot convey in the pages of a book the uniqueness and 
universality of Paramahansa Yogananda's vivid, loving personal-
ity. But it is my humble hope, in giving this brief background, 
to afford a personal glimpse that will enrich the reader's enjoy-
ment and appreciation of the talks presented in this volume. 
To have seen my Gurudeva in divine communion; to have 
heard the profound truths and devotional outpourings of his 
soul; to have recorded them for the ages,- and now to share them 
with all—what joy is mine! May the Master's sublime words 
open wider the doors to unshakable faith in God, to deeper love 
for that One who is our beloved Father, Mother, and Eternal 
Friend. 
DAYA MATA 
May 1975 

INTRODUCTION 
Mankind is engaged in an eternal quest for that 
"something else" he hopes will bring him happiness, 
complete and unending. For those individual souls 
who have sought and found God, the search is over: 
He is that something Else. 
—Sri Sri Paramahansa Yogananda 
This volume of talks by Sri Sri Paramahansa Yogananda is for 
all who have ever known disappointment, dissatisfaction, dis-
couragement, sorrow, or an unfulfilled spiritual longing. It is for 
those who have sought to understand the enigmas of life; for 
those who have held within their hearts an uncertain hope about 
the reality of God and the possibility that He could be known; 
and for seekers who have already turned toward God in their 
quest. May it be, for each reader, a ray of divine light on the path, 
bringing new life and inspiritation and a sense of direction. God 
is all things to all people. 
Man's Eternal Quest is a book about God: about God's place 
in man's life; in his hopes, will, aspirations,  accomplishments. 
Life, man, achievement—all are but manifestations of the one 
omnipresent Creator, as inseparably dependent on Him as the 
wave is dependent on the ocean. Paramahansaji explains why 
and how man was created by God, and how he is immutably a 
part of God, and what this means to each one personally. Real-
ization  of the  oneness  of man and his Creator  is the  whole 
essence of Yoga. An understanding of man's inescapable need for 
God, in every aspect of living, removes the  otherworldliness 
from religion and makes knowing God the basis of a scientific 
and practical approach to life. 
As man of God, and as an authority on the ancient  divine 
science of Yoga, Paramahansa Yogananda has received the highest 
credentials from his spiritual contemporaries, and from readers of 
his works in all parts of the world—the literary and general pub-
lic as well as his followers. That he has also received the ultimate 
[xiv] 

INTRODUCTION  M 
commendation from the Supreme Authority is amply attested to 
by the manifest blessings of God on his exemplary life, and by the 
infinitely beautiful, uniquely edifying responses he received from 
God in vision and divine communion. This comment in Review 
of Religions, published by Columbia University Press, is typical of 
the acclaim received by Paramahansa Yogananda's earlier work, 
Autobiography of a Yogi: "There has been nothing before, written 
in English or in any other European language, like this presenta-
tion of Yoga." The San Francisco Chronicle  wrote: "Yogananda 
presents a convincing case for yoga, and those who 'came to scoff' 
may remain to pray." From Schleswig-Holsteinische  Tagespost, 
Germany: "We must credit this book with the power to bring 
about a spiritual revolution." Of Paramahansa Yogananda himself, 
Swami Sivananda, founder of the Divine Life Society, Rishikesh, 
said: "A rare gem of inestimable value, the like of whom the world 
is yet to witness, Paramahansa Yogananda has been an ideal rep-
resentative of the ancient sages and seers, the glory of India." His 
Holiness the Shankaracharya of Kanchipuram, revered spiritual 
leader of millions in South India, wrote of Paramahansaji: "As a 
bright light shining in the midst of darkness, so was Yogananda's 
presence in this world. Such a great soul comes on earth only 
rarely, when there is a real need among men. We are grateful to 
Yogananda for spreading Hindu philosophy in such a wonderful 
way in America and the West." 
Sri Sri Paramahansa Yogananda was born in Gorakhpur, Uttar 
Pradesh, on January 5, 1893. He had a remarkable childhood that 
clearly indicated his life was marked for a divine destiny. His 
mother recognized this and encouraged his noble ideals and spiri-
tual aspirations. When he was only eleven, the loss of his mother, 
whom he loved above all else in this world, made firm his inher-
ent resolve to find God and to receive from the Creator Himself 
the answers yearned for in every human heart. He became a dis-
ciple of the great fnanavatar  (incarnation  of wisdom) Sri  Sri 
Swami Sri Yukteswar Giri. Sri Yukteswarji was one of a line of ex-
alted gurus, with whom Yoganandaji had been linked from birth: 
Sri Yogananda's parents were disciples of Sri Sri Lahiri Mahasaya, 
guru of Sri Yukteswarji. When Yoganandaji was an infant in his 
mother's arms, Lahiri Mahasaya had blessed him and foretold: 
"Little mother, thy son will be a yogi. As a spiritual engine, he 

[.xvi]  MAN'S ETERNAL QUEST 
will carry many souls to God's kingdom." Lahiri Mahasaya was a 
disciple of Sri Sri Mahavatar Babaji, the deathless master who 
revived in this age the ancient science of Kiiya Yoga. Praised by 
Bhagavan Krishna in the Bhagavad Gita, and by Patanjali in the 
Yoga Sutras, Kriya Yoga is both a transcendent technique of med-
itation and an art of living that leads to union of the soul with 
God. Mahavatar Babaji revealed the sacred Kriya to Lahiri Ma-
hasaya, who handed it down to Sri Yukteswarji, who taught it to 
Paramahansa Yogananda. 
When in 1920 Paramahansa Yogananda was deemed ready to 
begin his world mission of disseminating the  soul-liberating 
science of Yoga, Mahavatar Babaji told him of the divine respon-
sibility that was to be his: "You are the one I have chosen to 
spread the message of Kriya Yoga in the West. Long ago I met your 
guru Yukteswar at a Kumbha Mela-, I told him then I would send 
you to him for training. Kriya Yoga, the scientific technique of 
God-realization, will ultimately spread in all lands, and aid in 
harmonizing the nations through man's personal, transcendental 
perception of the Infinite Father." 
Paramahansa Yogananda began his mission in America as a 
delegate to the International Congress of Religious Liberals in 
Boston in 1920. For more than a decade he travelled the length and 
breadth of America, speaking almost daily to capacity audiences 
in all the major cities. On January 28, 1925, the Los Angeles Times 
reported: "The Philharmonic Auditorium presents the extraordi-
nary spectacle of thousands... being turned away an hour before 
the advertised opening of a lecture with the 3000-seat hall filled 
to its utmost  capacity. Swami Yogananda is the attraction. A 
Hindu invading the United States to bring God.... It came as no 
small revelation to the West that Yoga—so eloquently expounded 
and clearly interpreted by Sri Yogananda—is a universal science, 
and that as such it is the essence of all true religions. 
In Los Angeles in 1925, Paramahansa Yogananda founded the 
international headquarters for Self-Realization Fellowship, the 
society he had started in India in 1917 as Yogoda Satsanga Society 
of India. 
In the late 1930s Paramahansaji began to withdraw gradually 
from nationwide public lecturing. "I am not interested in crowds," 

INTRODUCTION  [xvii] 
he said, "but in souls who are in earnest to know God." There-
after, he concentrated his efforts on classes for serious students, 
and spoke mostly at his own Self-Realization Fellowship temples 
and the international headquarters. The selections in this volume 
are talks given primarily during this period. 
Paramahansa Yogananda had often voiced this prediction:  "I 
will not die in bed, but with my boots on, speaking of God and 
India." On March 7, 1952, the prophecy was fulfilled. At a banquet 
in honour of the Ambassador of India, B. R. Sen, Paramahansaji 
was a guest speaker. He delivered a soul-stirring address, conclud-
ing with these words from a poem he had written, "My India": 
"Where Ganges, woods, Himalayan caves and men dream God— 
I am hallowed; my body touched that sod!" He then lifted his eyes 
upward and entered mahasamadhi,  an advanced yogi's conscious 
earth-exit. He died as he had lived, exhorting man to know God. 
The Guru's talks in the earliest years of his ministry were 
recorded only spasmodically. But when Sri Sri Daya Mata became 
a disciple of Paramahansa Yogananda in 1931, she undertook the 
sacred task, faithfully recording, for the generations to come, all 
of her Guru's talks and classes. This volume is but a sampling: un-
der the direction of Paramahansa Yogananda, many transcriptions 
—particularly those containing private instruction and meditation 
techniques and principles given to Yogoda Satsanga/Self-Realiza-
tion class students—were compiled along with some of his writ-
ings into a series of Yogoda Satsanga Lessons; other talks appear 
as a regular feature in Yogoda Satsanga annual-series booklets. 
Second and third anthologies, The Divine Romance  and Journey 
to Self-Realization,  are companion volumes to Man's Eternal 
Quest. 
As most of the talks set forth in this book were presented 
before audiences familiar with Yogoda Satsanga/Self-Realization 
teachings, some clarification of terminology and philosophical 
concepts may be helpful to the general reader. To this end,, many 
footnotes have been included; also a glossary explaining certain 
Sanskrit words, and other philosophical terms, and giving infor-
mation about events, persons, and places associated with the life 
and work of Paramahansa Yogananda. It may be noted here that 
unless otherwise indicated the quotations from the Bhagavad Gita 

[.XVIII]  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
in this volume are from Paramahansa Yogananda's own transla-
tions, which he rendered from the Sanskrit sometimes literally 
and sometimes in paraphrase, depending on the context of his talk. 
For most Gita quotations in this edition of Man's Eternal Quest, 
we have used the definitive version given by Paramahansaji for his 
comprehensive translation  and commentary: God Talks With 
Arjuna: The Bhagavad Gita—Royal Science of God-Realization 
(published by Yogoda Satsanga Society of India in 2002). In talks 
where he was rendering a Gita passage more freely in order to 
emphasize a specific point, the paraphrase has been retained and 
noted as such in the footnote citation. 
Sri Sri Parmahansa Yogananda could have said, with Jesus, 
"Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets: I 
am not come to destroy, but to fulfill" (Matthew 5:17). Parama-
hansaji honoured all religions ajjd their founders, and held in 
respect all sincere seekers of God. Part of his world mission is "to 
reveal the complete harmony and basic oneness of original Yoga 
as taught by Bhagawan Krishna and original Christianity as taught 
by Jesus Christ.'^(See Aims and Ideals, Page 465.) Far from intro-
ducing a divisive dogma to the world, Paramahansaji showed that 
the practice of yoga establishes an inner attunement with God 
that constitutes the universal basis of all religions. Abstractions 
of theoretical religion pale before actual experience of God. Truth 
cannot be wholly proved to any seeker by anyone else; but by the 
practice of yoga, the aspirant can prove truth for himself through 
his own experience. 
God is; and each man who will seek Him sincerely will know 
Him. Man can have no life or power to act, think, or feel without 
borrowing that power from God. Therefore, Paramahansaji pointed 
out, knowing God is not only a privilege and a divine duty, but a 
practical necessity. Why should man grovel in self-insufficiency 
when he can tap the Source of all power and fulfillment? 
The wisdom in this volume is not the studied learning of a 
scholar,- it is the empirical testimony of a dynamic spiritual person-
age whose life was filled with inner joy and outer accomplishment, 
a world teacher who lived what he taught, a Premavatar whose sole 
desire was to share God's wisdom and love with all. 
YOGODA SATSANGA SOCIETY OF INDIA/ 
SELF-REALIZATION FELLOWSHIP 

MAN'S ETERNAL QUEST 

How Seekers First Found God 
Self-Realization Fellowship International Headquarters, 
Los Angeles, California, November 11, 1934 
We can readily understand how man first conceived of a sci-
ence of medicine. He suffered physically and therefore sought a 
method to heal himself. But how did man happen to try to find 
out about God? The question gives scope for profound reflection. 
In the Vedas* of India we find the earliest true concept of 
God- In her scriptures  India has given the world  immortal 
truths that have stood the test of time. 
Every material inventor is actuated by material  need— 
"necessity is the mother of invention." Similarly motivated by 
necessity,  the early rishist  of India became ardent  spiritual 
seekers. They had found that without inner satisfaction,  no 
amount of external good fortune can bring lasting happiness. 
How then can one make himself really happy? That  is  the 
problem the wise men of India undertook to solve. 
Three Aspects of Nature 
Worship of God in prehistoric times began through man's 
fear of the various forces of nature. When it rained excessively, 
floods killed many people. Awed, man thought of the rain and 
wind and other natural forces as gods. 
Later on, human beings realized that nature operates in 
three ways: creative, preservative,  and dissolutive.  A wave 
* From the Sanskrit vid, "to know." The Vedas comprise a voluminous scrip-
ture of 100,000 couplets. The origin of the Vedas is lost in antiquity. They 
were passed down orally for millenniums. According to tradition, the illu-
mined sage Vyasa, who lived at the time of Bhagavan Krishna (see glossary), 
was the compiler and arranger of the Vedas in their present form: Rig Veda, 
Sama Veda, Yajur Veda, and Atharva Veda. 
t Literally "seers." The rishis were the inspired personages to whom the Vedas 
were revealed in an indeterminable antiquity. 
3 

4  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
rising out of the ocean exemplifies the creative state; staying 
for a moment on the sea-breast, it is in the preservative state; 
and sinking back into the deep, it passes through the dissolu-
tive state. 
Just as Jesus beheld the universal force of evil personified 
in Satan, so the great rishis beheld the universal forces of cre-
ation,  preservation,  and dissolution  personified  in  definite 
forms. ($he  sages of old named  them  Brahma  the  Creator, 
Vishnu the Preserver, and Shiva the Destroyed These primal 
powers were created as projections of the unmanifested Spirit 
to unfold His infinite drama of creation, while He, as God be-
yond creation, remains ever hidden behind their consciousness. 
In times of cosmic dissolution, all creation and its vast activat-
ing forces dissolve back into Spirit. There they rest until called 
upon again by the Great Director to reenact their roles. * 
/ r / c&o 
A Story About Brahma. Vishnu. And Shiva 
In India there is a popular story about Brahma, Vishnu, and 
Shiva.  They  were boasting  among  themselves  about  their 
tremendous might. Suddenly a little boy came up and said to 
Brahma, "What do you create?" "Everything," Brahma replied 
grandly. The boy asked the other two gods what their work 
was. "We preserve and destroy everything," they answered. 
The young visitor was holding in his hand a single piece of 
straw  about  the size  of a toothpick.  Placing  it  in front  of 
Brahma, he asked, "Can you create a piece of straw like this?" 
After prodigious effort, Brahma found to his astonishment that 
he cound not. The lad then turned to Vishnu and asked him to 
save the straw, which was slowly starting to dissolve under the 
boy's steady gaze. Vishnu's efforts to hold it together were 
fruitless. Finally, the little stranger produced the piece of straw 
again and asked Shiva to destroy it. But try as Shiva would to 
annihilate it, the tiny straw remained intact. 
The little boy turned again to Brahma: "Did you create 
* "They are true knowers.. .who understand the Day of Brahma, which endures 
for a thousand cycles (yugas), and the Night of Brahma, which also endures for 
a thousand cycles. At the dawn of Brahma's Day all creation, reborn, emerges 
from .the state of non-manifestation; at the dusk of Brahma's Night all creation 
sinks into the sleep of non-manifestation" (Bhagavad Gita VIII: 17-18). 

HOW SEEKERS FIRST FOUND GOD  5 
me?" he asked. Brahma thought and thought; he could not 
remember ever having created this amazing child. Suddenly 
the boy vanished. The three gods awoke from their delusion 
and remembered that behind their power is a Greater Power. 
God, the Supreme Cause 
In the Western world the idea of God developed through 
observation of the law of cause and effect. Man can material-
ize objects by taking materials from the earth and shaping 
them  in accordance  with  a preconceived  idea;  therefore  it 
seemed reasonable to conclude that this whole universe must 
have been created out of ideas. This led to the concept  that 
everything must have existed first as an idea. Someone had to 
create that first idea or cosmic plan. Thus through the analogy 
of the law of cause and effect, intelligent men reasoned that 
there must be a Supreme Cause. 
Science has learned that all matter is made of invisible 
building blocks—electrons  and protons—just  as a house is 
built of bricks. But nobody can tell why some electrons and 
protons become wood, and others become human bone, and so 
on. What Intelligence guides them? This line of questioning 
gives room for God in even the material scientist's  theories 
about the nature of the phenomenal worlds. The sages of India 
say  that  everything  proceeds  from  and goes  back  into  its 
source: God. 
Evidence of Order and Harmony Is Everywhere 
Perceiving that every human being is a compound of mat-
ter and mind, the earliest Western thinkers believed that two 
independent forces existed: nature and mind. Later they began 
asking themselves, "Why is everything in nature arranged in a 
particular way? Why isn't one of man's arms longer than the 
other? Why don't stars and planets collide? Everywhere we see 
evidence of order and harmony in the universe." They con-
cluded that mind and matter could not be both separate and 
sovereign; a single Intelligence must govern all. This conclu-
sion naturally led to the idea that there is just one God, who is 
both the Cause of matter and the Intelligence within and be-
hind it. One who attains the ultimate wisdom realizes that 
everything is Spirit—in essence, though hidden in manifesta-

6  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
tion. If you had the perception, you would see God in every-
thing. Then the question is, how did seekers first find Him? 
As the beginning step, they closed their eyes to shut out 
immediate contact with the world and matter, so they could 
concentrate more fully on discovering the Intelligence behind 
it. They reasoned that they could not behold God's presence in 
nature through the ordinary perceptions of the five senses. So 
they began to try to feel Him within themselves by deeper and 
deeper concentration. They eventually discovered how to shut 
off all five senses, thus temporarily doing away entirely with 
the consciousness of matter. The inner world of the  Spirit 
began to open up* To those great ones of ancient India who un-
deviatingly persisted in these inner investigations, God finally 
revealed Himself. 
Devotion and Right Activity Attract God's Attention 
Thus the saints gradually began to convert their concep-
tions of God into perceptions of Him. That is what you must 
do also, if you would know Him. You don't stay long enough 
at your prayers. First you must have a right concept of God— 
a definite idea through which you can form a relationship with 
Him—and then you must meditatet and pray until that men-
tal conception becomes changed into actual perception. Then 
you will know Him. If you persist, the Lord will come. The 
Searcher of Hearts wants only your sincere love. He is like a 
little child: someone may offer Him his whole wealth and He 
doesn't want it; and another cries to Him, "O Lord, I love You!" 
and into that devotee's heart He comes running. 
Don't seek God with any ulterior motive, but pray to Him 
with devotion—unconditional,  one-pointed, steady devotion. 
When your love for Him is as great as your attachment to your 
mortal body, He will come to you. 
In  seeking  the  Lord,  activity  comes  after  devotion  in 
importance. Some say, "God is Power,- therefore let us act with 
*J"..Aoi,  behold, the kingdom of God is within you" (Luke 17:21, Bible), 
t  Meditation is that special form of concentration in which the attention has 
been liberated, by scientific yoga techniques, from the restlessness of the 
body-conscious state and is focused unfalteringly on God. Meditation is the 
concentrated flow of one's attention and consciousness toward communion 
and oneness with God. 

HOW SEEKERS FIRST FOUND GOD  7 
power." When you are active in doing good, with the Lord ever 
uppermost in your mind, you will perceive Him in this way. 
But there is wrong as well as right activity even in doing good. 
A zealous churchman who brings more and more people into 
his congregation solely to satisfy his own ego is not going to 
please God through that activity. To realize the presence of the 
Divine Indweller should be the first desire in every heart. 
It is when you persistently, selflessly perform every action 
with love-inspired thoughts of God that He will come to you. 
Then you realize that you are the Ocean of Life, which has 
become the tiny wave of each life. That is the way of know-
ing the Lord through activity. When in every action you think 
of Him before you act, while you are performing the action, 
and after you have finished it, He will reveal Himself to you. 
You must work, but let God work through you,- this is the best 
part of devotion. If you are constantly thinking that He is 
walking through your feet, working through your hands, ac-
complishing  through  your will,  you will  know  Him.  You 
should also develop discrimination, so that you prefer spiritu-
ally constructive, God-conscious activity to work performed 
without any thought of Him. 
Meditation Is the Highest Form of Activity 
But greater than activity, devotion, or reason, is meditation. 
To meditate truly is to concentrate solely on Spirit. This is es-
oteric meditation. It is the highest form of activity that man can 
perform, and it is the most balanced way to find God. If you 
work afy the time you may become mechanical and lose Him in 
preoccupation  with your duties,- and if you seek Him  only 
through  discriminative  thought  you  may  lose  Him  in  the 
labyrinths of endless reasoning; and if you cultivate only devo-
tion for God, your development may become merely emotional. 
But meditation combines and balances all these approaches. 
Work, eat, walk, laugh, cry, meditate—only for Him. That 
is the best way to live. In so doing you will be truly happy serv-
ing Him, loving Him, and communing with Him. So long as 
you let the desires and weaknesses of the physical body con-
trol your thoughts and actions, you will not find Him. Always 
be master of your body. When you sit in the church or temple, 

8  MAN'S ETERNAL QUEST 
you perhaps feel a little devotion and a little  discriminative 
perception, but that is not enough. The esoteric activity of 
meditation is necessary if you really want to be aware of His 
presence. 
You might  think  that  after two hours of meditation  I 
would be bored to death. No, I couldn't find anything in the 
world as intoxicating as this God of mine. When I drink that 
aged wine of my soul, a skyful of happiness throbs in my heart. 
Divine joy is in everyone. Sunlight shines equally on the char-
coal and the diamond, but the diamond reflects the light. Such 
are the transparent minds that know and reflect Spirit. 
Thus in the esoteric activity of meditation you have the 
solution to the mystery of knowing God. I do not blame you 
for what you do, but for what you do not do. You think you 
have no time for God. Suppose the Lord were too busy to look 
after you? What then? Wrest your mind from the mirage of the 
senses and habit. Why be deluded like that? I am pointing out 
to you a land more beautiful than anything here can ever be. I 
am telling you of a happiness that will intoxicate you night 
and day—you won't need sense temptations to enthral you. 
Discipline your body and your mind. Control your senses. 
Find God! 
I often say that this body is a switchboard and the five 
senses are its telephone instruments. Through them I am in 
touch with the world; but when I don't wish to communicate, 
I shut off my five senses and live in the inexpressible joy of 
God. The Heavenly Father doesn't want you, His children, to 
suffer anymore. The sensory delusion in which you live must 
be  overcome.  You  should  conceive  of  God  as the  highest 
necessity  of life. Break the shackles  of limitation,  of dark 
habits and mechanical daily routine. I condemn no man—only 
man's unbelief and oblivion of God. He can be known by using 
the technique of meditation. Then He shall throb as wisdom 
in your mind, and as joy in your heart, and you will be more 
active and more successful than you have ever been before. 
Dear ones, I was once like you. I walked the earth seeking 
truth and happiness, yet everything that promised me joy gave 
me misery, and so I turned to God. You all must discover your 
own divinity and win the kingdom of God for yourselves. 

HOW SEEKERS FIRST FOUND  GOD  9 
The Self Is Your Saviour 
These deep truths are not for the inspiration of a passing 
moment but should be assimilated and made practical for your 
highest benefit. If only people knew wherein lies their own 
good! To those who act wrongly the Self is an enemy. Befriend 
the Self and the Self will save you. There is no other saviour 
than your Self. * The fetters of ignorance and bad habits keep 
you bound. It is because you are determined to follow your 
wrong habits that you suffer. If only you would picture life a 
little ahead; lest the time, the precious time that is given you, 
slip away fruitlessly. The Hindus have a saying: "The child is 
busy with play, the youth is busy with sex, and the adult is 
busy with worries. How few are busy with God!" 
Banish the imaginary hope that happiness will come from 
worldly fulfillments. Prosperity isn't enough, "gracious living" 
isn't enough. You want to be eternally happy. Seize the God 
within you and realize that the Self is Divinity. You must be 
able to answer with surety the highest question of your intel-
ligence: "Whence did I come?" 
God and immortality are not myths. It is the gravest insult 
to the Self within you to die believing you are a mortal being. 
How long will you let yourselves, sons of God, be helplessly 
mowed down by the sickle of death because you never tried 
during your lifetime to conquer may a, t  ignorance? 
Reason Gives Man the Power to Seek God 
There is a God. He has given man independence, power, 
and reason. Man can find the Lord because of thegift of reason. 
To spend your time just playing with life and not finding God 
is wasting the divinely bestowed power within you. 
* "Let man uplift the self (ego) by the self; let the self not be self-degraded. For 
him whose self (ego) has been conquered by the Self (soul), the Self is the friend 
of the self; but verily, the Self behaves inimically, as an enemy, toward the self 
that is not subdued" (Bhagavad Gita IV:5-6). 
t Cosmic illusion,- "the measurer." Maya is the magical power in creation by 
which limitations and divisions are apparently present in the Immeasurable 
and Inseparable. In God's plan and play [lila], the sole function of this delusive 
power is to cast a veil of ignorance over man to divert his awareness from 
Spirit to matter, from Reality to unreality. 

10  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
Use the key of reason. It is not found in stones and ani-
mals. God gave man reason that he might find freedom from 
the delusion of mortality. If you let your reason be trampled by 
ego'ancf wrong Habits, what then? If people bow to your will, 
what then? Happiness still eludes you. That is why Jesus chose 
God instead of Satan when the Devil tried to tempt him. Jesus 
realized that although worldly power has many attractions, it 
does not last. He had found something greater than all  the 
riches of this universe. The things that most men desire are 
perishable. But God will never leave Jesus. He is still enjoying 
the omnipresent  divine kingdom. So should each one of us 
choose the life that leads to God. 
You are punishing the soul by keeping it buried, slumber-
ing in matter life after life, frightened by nightmares of suffer-
ing and death. Realize that you are the soul! Remember  that 
the Feeling behind your feeling, the Will behind your will, the 
Power behind your power, the Wisdom behind your wisdom is 
the Infinite Lord. Unite the heart's feeling and the mind's rea-
son in a perfect balance. In the castle of calmness, again and 
again cast off identification with earthly titles, and plunge into 
deep meditation to realize your divine kingship. 
Look within yourself.  Remember,  the Infinite is every-
where. Diving deep into superconsciousness, * you can speed 
your mind through eternity,- by the power of mind you can go 
farther than the farthest star. The searchlight of mind is fully 
equipped to throw its superconscious rays into the innermost 
heart of Truth. Use it to do so. 
Remember; it is you who must travel to the kingdom of 
heaven; it will not come to you by special delivery. Each man 
has to hie his own way alone. From this day make a resolution 
in your heart to seek God. When many devotees follow  the 
path to Him, there will arise a "United States of the World,"+ 
with God and His love as man's Director and Guide. 
* Soul-consciousness, which is intuitive and all-knowing. The superconscious 
mind is thus the omniscient power of the soul. (See also spiritual eye in glossary.) 
t As the individual states of America maintain independence and yet are 
united in common ideals and goals, so if God's kingdom is to come on earth, 
the various contries of the Xvorld must similarly unite in a bond of harmonious 
cooperation and brotherhood. 

HOW SEEKERS FIRST FOUND  GOD  11 
I want to give you more than the temporary inspiration of 
words alone; I want to shoot star-shells of wisdom straight into 
your spiritual darkness, that by their bursting light you may 
see for yourself the truth of what I have said. 
The Two Paths: Activity and Meditation 
To summarize, there are basically two approaches to God-
realization: the outer way and thejnner, or transcendental way.  , 
The outer way is by right activity, loving and serving mankind 
with the consciousness centred in God; the transcendental way  j 
is by deep esoteric meditation. By the transcendental way you  / 
realize all the things you are not, and discover That which you 
are: "I am not the breath; I am not the body, neither bones nor 
flesh. I am not the mind or feeling. I am That which is behind 
the breath, body, mind, and feeling." When you go beyond the 
consciousness of this world, knowing that you are not the body 
or the mind, and yet aware as never before that you exist—that 
divine consciousness is what you are. You are That in which is 
rooted everything in the universe. 
Why not inquire behind the darkness when you close your 
eyes? That is the place to explore. "And the light shineth  in 
darkness; and the darkness comprehended it not."* Vast lights 
and cosmic forces are moving there. 
Skyfuls of Eternal Bliss Will Be Opened 
Samadhii  is a joyous experience, a splendid light in which 
you behold the countless worlds floating in a vast bed of joy 
and bliss. Banish the spiritual ignorance that makes you think 
this mortal life is real. Have these beautiful experiences for 
yourself in eternal samadhi,  in God. Auroras of light, skyfuls 
of eternal bliss will be opened to you. 
All great teachers declare that within this body is the im-
mortal soul, a spark of That which sustains all. He who knows 
his soul knows this truth: "I am beyond everything finite; I 
now see that the Spirit, alone in space with Its ever-new joy, 
has expressed Itself as the vast body of nature. I am the stars, I 
* John 1:5 (Bible). 
t Spiritual ecstasy; state of God-union experienced as the ultimate goal of 
meditation. 

12  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
am the waves, I am the Life of all; I am the laughter within all 
hearts, I am the smile on the faces of flowers and in each soul. 
I am the Wisdom and Power that sustain all creation." 
Realize that! My words may remain vibrating within you; 
but if you sleep on in delusion, you will not know it. If you 
awaken, you will be conscious that the truth I have spoken is 
ever throbbing within your soul. Meditate. Learn this liberat-
ing lesson. Wait no more. I came here not to entertain you 
with worldly festivities* but to arouse your sleeping memory 
of immortality. You do not realize the pain that comes to those 
who remain in delusion. I suffer for you, and will do everything 
to help you realize that illumination is within. 
Free yourself forever! 
* As a part of his effort to foster a broader understanding between the cultures 
of East and West, Paramahansa Yogananda occasionally arranged social gath-
erings at the Self-Realization Fellowship International Headquarters. He refers 
here to a "Hindu-American Banquet" that was to follow this talk. 

The Universality  of Yoga 
Self-Realization Fellowship Temple, 
Hollywood, California, May 21, 1944 
Yoga is a system of scientific methods for reuniting  the 
soul with the Spirit. We have come down from God, and we 
must reascend to Him. We have seemingly become separated 
from our Father, and we must consciously reunite with Him. 
Yoga teaches us how to rise above the delusion of separation 
and realize our oneness with God. The poet Milton wrote of 
the soul of man and how it might regain paradise. That is the 
purpose and goal of Yoga—to regain the lost paradise of soul 
consciousness by which man knows that he is, and ever has 
been, one with Spirit. 
The world's various religions are based more or less on 
the beliefs  of man. But the true basis of religion should be a 
science that all devotees may apply in order to reach our one 
Father-God. Yoga is that science. The practice of a science  of 
religion  is imperative. Different dogmatic  "isms"  have kept 
mankind divided, although Jesus pointed out: "If a house be 
divided  against  itself,  that  house  cannot  stand."*  Unity 
among various religions may be brought about only when the 
individuals  who  practise  those  religions  become  actually 
aware of God within. Then we shall have a true brotherhood 
of man under the Fatherhood of God. 
The great religions of the world all preach the necessity of 
finding God, of brotherhood among men; and all have a moral 
code, such as the Ten Commandments. What, then, creates the 
differences among them? It is the bigotry in men's minds. Not 
by concentrating on dogma may we reach God, but by actual 
soul  knowledge.  When  men  perceive  the  universal  truths 
underlying various religions, there ^vill be no more difficulties 
* Mark  3:25. 

14  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
over dogma. To me there is neither Jew, nor Christian,  nor 
Hindu; all are my brothers. I worship in all temples, for each of 
them has been erected to honour my Father. 
We should begin to build world unity with the idea that 
has been initiated by Self-Realization Fellowship [Yogoda Sat-
sanga Society of India]: a "Church of All Religions"; not eclec-
ticism, but respect for all religions as constituting  various 
paths to God. Such temples, dedicated to the one God that all 
religions worship, should be built everywhere. I predict that 
this will come about. East and West should destroy forever nar-
row divisions in the houses of God. Attaining Self-Realization 
through Yoga, men will come to know that they are all chil-
dren of the one Father. 
The Blind Cannot Lead the Blind 
That unity of spirit is demonstrated in great men, those 
with God-realization. The blind cannot lead the blind; only a 
master, * one who knows God, may rightly teach others about 
Him. To regain one's divinity one must have such a master or 
guru.t He who faithfully follows a true guru becomes like him, 
for the guru helps to elevate the disciple to his own level of re-
alization. When I found my guru, Swami Sri Yukteswarji, $ I 
made up my mind to follow his example: to place God alone 
on the altar of my heart, and to share Him with others. 
The Hindu masters taught that to gain the deepest knowl-
edge one should focus his gaze through the omniscient  spiri-
tual eye. When concentrating hard, even the non-yogi wrinkles 
his forehead at the point between the eyebrows—the centre of 
concentration and of the spherical spiritual eye, the seat of soul 
intuition. That is the real "crystal ball," into which the yogi 
* One who is master of himself—of the mind, emotions, senses, passions. His 
actions, unclouded by egoistic motives, are consonant with the will of God; 
and he knows himself as one with God, not in imagination but in actual 
experience of Divne Omnipresence. 
t Spiritual teacher. The Guru Gita (17-19) aptly describes the guru as "dis-
peller of darkness" (from gu, "darkness" and ru, "that which dispels"). By 
divine right the title of guru is conferred only upon those exalted souls who, 
through their own Self-realization and oneness with God, are qualified to lead 
others from the darkness of ignorance to the everlasting light of Truth. 
t In Autobiography of a Yogi, Paramahansa Yogananda describes his association 
with his divine guru, whom he called a Jnanavatai,  "Incarnation of Wisdom." 

Paramahansa Yogananda in New York, 1926 

During the years  1920 through  1935, Paramahansa Yogananda 
conducted extensive lectures and classes to capacity audiences 
in  major  cities  across  the  United  States. The  Los  Angeles 
Times  reported:  "The  Philharmonic  Auditorium  presents  the 
extraordinary  spectacle  of  thousands  being  turned  away  an 
hour before the advertised opening." 

THE UNIVERSALITY  OF YOGA  15 
gazes to learn the secrets of the universe. Those who go deep 
enough in their concentration will penetrate that "third" eye 
and see God. Seekers of truth therefore should develop the abil-
ity to project their perception through the spiritual eye. The 
practice of Yoga helps the aspirant to open the single eye of in-
tuitive consciousness. * 
Intuition or direct knowledge does not depend on any data 
from the senses. That  is why the intuitive faculty is often 
called the "sixth sense." Everyone has this sixth sense, but 
most people do not develop it. However, almost everyone has 
had some intuitional experience, perhaps a "feeling" that a par-
ticular thing is going to happen, when there is no sensory evi-
dence to indicate it. 
It is important to develop intuition, or direct soul knowl-
edge,  for  he  who  is  God-conscious  is  sure  of himself. He 
knows, and he knows that he knows. We must be sure of God's 
presence, as sure as we are that we know the taste of an orange. 
It was only after my guru had shown me how to  commune 
with God and after I had felt His presence every day that I as-
sumed the spiritual duty of telling others about Him. 
The West has emphasized large temples of worship, but 
there are few in which the worshippers are shown how God 
may be found. In the East, the emphasis has been on the de-
velopment of men of God-realization; but they are in many 
cases inaccessible to spiritual seekers, remaining in seclusion 
in remote and solitary abodes. Spiritual centres in which peo-
ple may commune with God, and teachers who can show peo-
ple how to do so, are both necessary. How may one receive 
knowledge of God from a teacher who himself does not know 
God? My guru impressed upon me the necessity of knowing 
the Heavenly Father before trying to tell others about Him. 
How grateful I am to have received his training! He himself 
truly communed with God. 
* During deep meditation, the single or spiritual eye becomes visible as a bright 
star surrounded by a sphere of blue light that, in turn, is encircled by a brilliant 
halo of golden light. This omniscient eye is variously referred to in scriptures 
as the third eye, the star of the East, the inner eye, the dove descending from 
heaven, the eye of Shiva, and the eye of intuition. "If therefore thine eye be 
single, thy whole body shall be full of light" (Matthew 6:22, Bible). 

16  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
The Lord must first be perceived in one's own bodily tem-
ple. Every seeker should daily discipline his thoughts and place 
on the altar of his soul the wildflowers of his devotion. He who 
finds God within will be able to feel His presence in every 
church or temple he enters. 
Yoga Converts Theology to Practical Experience 
Yoga enables man to perceive the truth in all religions. The 
Ten Commandments are preached, in various words, in every 
religion. But the two greatest commandments are those em-
phasized by Jesus: "Love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, 
and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind," and "Thou shalt 
love thy neighbour as thyself."* 
Loving God "with all thy mind" means withdrawing one's 
attention from the senses and giving it to God; giving to Him 
one's whole concentration in meditation. Every seeker of God 
must learn to concentrate. A prayer that one utters while at the 
same time thinking of other things in the background of the 
mind is not a true prayer and is unheeded by God. Yoga teaches 
that in order to find the Father it is first necessary to seek Him 
with all one's mind, with concentration that is one-pointed. 
Some people say that the Hindus are more adapted to the 
practice of Yoga, that Yoga is not suited to Westerners. This is 
not true. Many Westerners are at present in a better position 
to practise Yoga than many Hindus are, because  scientific 
advancements have given Westerners much free time. India 
should more and more utilize the progressive material meth-
ods of the West to make life easier and freer; and the West 
should take from India the practical metaphysical methods of 
Yoga whereby every man may find his way to God. Yoga is not 
a sect but a universally applicable science by which we can 
find our Father. 
Yoga is for everybody, for the people of the West as well as 
for those of the East. One would not say that the telephone is 
* Matthew 22:37, 39. Krishna's teachings in the Bhagavad Gita similarly stress 
these two commandments: "On Me [the Lord] fix thy mind, be thou My devo-
tee, with ceaseless worship bow reverently before Me. Having thus united thy-
self to Me as thy Highest Goal, thou shalt be Mine Own" (EX:34); and "The 
best type of yogi is he who feels for others, whether in grief or pleasure, even 
as he feels for himself" (VI:32). 

THE UNIVERSALITY  OF YOGA  17 
not for the East just because it was invented in the West. Sim-
ilarly, the methods of Yoga, although developed in the East, are 
not exclusively for the East but are useful to all mankind. 
Whether a man is born in India or in America, he someday 
has to die. Why not learn how to "die daily" in God, like St. 
Paul? * Yoga teaches the method. Man lives in the body as a pris-
oner; when his term is over, he suffers the indignity of being 
thrown out. Love of the body is therefore nothing more than 
love of jail. Long accustomed to living in the body, we have for-
gotten what real freedom means. Being a Westerner is no excuse 
for not seeking freedom. It is vital to every man that he discover 
his soul and know his immortal nature. Yoga shows the way. 
The Soul Must Reascend to God 
Before creation existed there was Cosmic  Consciousness: 
Spirit or God, the Absolute, ever-existing, ever-conscious, ever-
new Bliss beyond form and manifestation. When creation came 
into being, Cosmic Consciousness "descended" into the physi-
cal universe where it manifests as Christ Consciousness:t  the 
omnipresent  pure reflection  of God's intelligence  and con-
sciousness inherent and hidden within all creation. When the 
Christ Consciousness descends into the physical body of man 
it becomes soul, or superconsciousness: the ever-existing, ever-
conscious, ever-new bliss of God individualized by encasement 
in the body. When the soul becomes identified with the body, it 
manifests as ego, mortal consciousness. Yoga teaches that the 
soul must climb back up the ladder of consciousness to Spirit.* 
* I Corinthians  15:31 (Bible). 
t The Hindu scriptures refer to Christ Consciousness as Kutastha  Chaitanya, 
universal consciousness or omnipresent intelligence. 
* Yoga teaches that the abode of the soul—of man's life and divine con-
sciousness—is in the subtle spiritual centres in the brain: Sahasrara, the thou-
sand-petaled lotus at the top of the cerebrum, seat of cosmic consciousness,-
Kutastha,  at the point between the eyebrows, seat of Christ consciousness,-
and the medullary centre (connected by polarity to the Kutastha), seat of su-
perconsciousness. Descending into the body (and body-consciousness) from 
these centres of highest spiritual perception, life and consciousness flow down 
the spine, passing through five astral spinal centres (see chakras  in glossary) 
and branching outward into the physical organs of life, sensory perception, and 
action. 

18  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
Secret of Happiness Is Consciousness of God's Presence 
It is all right to enjoy life; the secret of happiness is not to 
become attached to anything. Enjoy the smell of the flower, 
but see God in it. I have kept the consciousness of the senses 
only that in using them I may always perceive and think of 
God. "Mine eyes were made to behold Thy beauty everywhere. 
My ears were made to hear Thine omnipresent voice." That is 
yoga, union with God. it is not necessary to go to the forest to 
find Him. Worldly habits will hold us fast wherever we may be 
until we free ourselves from them. The yogi learns to find God 
in the cave of his heart. Wherever he goes, he carries with him 
the blissful consciousness of God's presence. 
Man has not only descended into mortal sense conscious-
ness but has become bound by abnormalities of that sense con-
sciousness, such as greed, anger, and jealousy. Man must ban-
ish these abnormalities in order to find God. Both  Easterners 
and Westerners should be free from sense slavery. An ordinary 
man may become angry because his morning coffee hasn't been 
brought to him and he is sure the deprivation will give him a 
headache. He is a slave of his habits. The developed yogi is free. 
Everyone can be a yogi, right where he is now. But we are 
prone to think strange and difficult anything that is beyond the 
horizon of our own habits of life. We do not consider how our 
habits may appear to others! 
The practice of Yoga leads to freedom. Some yogis carry 
this idea of non-attachment to extremes. They teach that one 
should be able to lie on a bed of nails without discomfort, and 
other forms of tapasya, physical discipline. It is true that one 
who can sit on a bed of nails and think of God shows great 
strength of mind. But such feats are not necessary. One may 
just as well sit in a comfortable chair and meditate on God. 
Paranjali*  teaches that any posture that keeps the spine 
To regain the blissful realization of its oneness with God, the soul of man 
must retrace its downward course, ascending by the sacred spinal route to its 
home in the higher cerebral centres of divine awareness. This is accomplished 
by the practice of guru-given scientific techniques of yogic meditation, such 
as may be learned from the Yogoda Satsanga Lessons.  (See glossary.) 
* Foremost exponent of Yoga. Patanjali's date is unknown, though many 
scholars assign him to the second century B.C. 

THE UNIVERSALITY  OF YOGA  19 
erect is good for meditation, yogic concentration on God. It is 
not necessary to go through physical contortions or to practice 
exercises requiring extraordinary physical endurance and sup-
pleness, as is advocated in Hatha Yoga. God is the objective; 
consciousness of His presence is what we should work toward. 
The Bhagavad Gita says: "He who with devotion absorbs him-
self in Me, with his soul immersed in Me, him I regard, among 
all classes of yogis, as the most equillibrated."* 
Hindu yogis have been known to demonstrate  oblivious-
ness to extremes of heat and cold, and to mosquitoes and other 
annoying insects. Such a demonstration is not a requisite of be-
ing a yogi, but it is a natural achievement of the adept. Try to 
eliminate disturbing elements; or to endure them, if necessary, 
without being disturbed inwardly by them. If one can remain 
clean, it is pointless to be dirty. One may become attached to 
living in a hut as well as to living in a palace. 
The greatest factor in achieving spiritual success is will-
ingness. Jesus said, "The harvest truly is plenteous, but the 
labourers are few."+ People of the world seek the gifts of God, 
but he who is wise seeks the Giver Himself. 
To be a yogi is to meditate. The yogi doesn't think first of 
food for his body upon waking each morning; he feeds his soul 
with the ambrosia of God-communion. Filled with the inspi-
ration found by his deeply diving meditative mind, he is able 
to perform happily all the duties of the day. 
God made this earth as it is on purpose; in His plan it is 
man's part to make the world better. The Westerner tends to 
go to extremes in keeping constantly busy getting new and 
improved material comforts. The Easterner tends to go to ex-
tremes in being satisfied with what he has. There is something 
appealing about both the go-ahead spirit of the West and the 
easy, calm spirit of the East. We should take the balanced road 
between. 
Meditation Makes the Yogi 
To  find God,  one  should  meditate  every  morning  and 
night, and whenever there is a little spare time during the day. 
In addition, it is important to meditate for six hours on one day 
* VI:47.  t Matthew  9:37. 

20  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
out of the week. This is not unreasonable; some people prac-
tice at the piano for ten hours every day of the week, and think 
nothing of it. To become a spiritual master, it is necessary to 
give more time to God. We have to make Him feel that we love 
Him more than anything else. When you become experienced 
in meditation, able to go deep into superconsciousness,  five 
hours of sleep are enough. The rest of the night should be used 
for meditation. One can use nights and early mornings and hol-
idays for meditating on God. In this way anyone, even the busy 
Westerner, can be a yogi. So become a Western yogi. You don't 
have to wear a turban or to have long hair like me! 
We need the "hives" of churches, but we also need to fill the 
churches with the "honey" of our own Self-realization/  God is 
present in the churches too, of course; but your just going there 
will not persuade Him to reveal Himself. Church-going is good, 
but daily meditation is better still. Do both, because you will 
certainly have inspiration from going to church; and from daily 
meditation you will receive even greater upliftment. It is when 
a devotee's heart is afire and when he throws shell after shell of 
prayer that God surrenders to him. That unceasing devotion is 
essential to finding Him. In order to be a yogi and still keep pace 
with the morden world, it is necessary to meditate at home, to 
discipline oneself, and to perform all duties with the attitude 
that they are a service to God. 
My greatest desire is to build temples of God in the souls 
of men; to see the smile of God on men's faces. The most im-
portant of all life's accomplishments is to establish a temple of 
God in one's own soul. And it can be easily done. That is why 
Self-Realization Fellowship was sent to the West. 
Anyone who has established God in his soul temple is a 
yogi. He can say, with me, that Yoga is for the East, North, 
South, and West—for all people, that they may follow  the 
byways of theology to join the highway of Yoga. The right road 
leads to the palace of God's bliss. He who once reaches there 
shall "go no more out."+ 
* Knowing one's Self as the soul, and that the soul is one with God. 
t Revelation  3:12 (Bible). 

The Infinite Nature of God 
Self-Realization Fellowship International Headquarters, 
Los Angeles, California, January 28, 1937 
The Hindu scriptures state that God is beyond compre-
hension by mind and intellect. Powerful as they are, their scope 
is insufficient to contain Him. So the human mind is incapable 
of a true conception of God. The question "Who made God?" 
arises only because mind cannot comprehend That which has 
neither beginning nor end. 
When you are looking at the sun millions of miles away in 
the sky, that huge luminary seems smaller by far than  our 
earth. Yet the diameter of earth is roughly 7,900 miles,- and the 
sun is more than a hundred times that wide. If you could place 
our planet next to the sun, earth would appear by comparison 
a tiny dot. Let us suppose the giant solar orb is  expanding, 
growing more and more huge, until the vast blue expanse of the 
sky is entirely swallowed up by its mass. The space thus filled 
is nevertheless but a particle, a mere speck, of the space that 
spreads through countless universes and into infinity. Were the 
sun to go on endlessly enlarging in space, still it would not be 
able to take the measure of infinity. The cosmic delusion of 
finitude prevents the mind from conceiving such  vastness. 
Where are its boundaries? Whence came this endless void? The 
Originless Immeasurable is God. Omnipresent in the farthest 
reaches of space, He is in the distant stars, and in you and me; 
and He is conscious every moment of every place He is. 
God is not mind—He created it and He is beyond it. Oth-
erwise we could conceive Him in our minds. We can accurately 
call Him Divine Consciousness, Divine Joy, Divine Existence, 
but not mind. 
Though mind is incapable of encompassing Omnipresence, 
21 

22  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
it is nevertheless able to feel  God. Feeling His presence and 
measuring it are two different experiences. The wave cannot 
measure the ocean, but there is a point of contact  between 
them. So where the Infinite becomes the finite there is a point 
of contact: the superconscious mind. That mind can feel God. 
When we expand the ordinary mind until it impinges on the 
superconscious mind, we are able to feel His presence. 
We Have Descended from the Infinite into the Finite 
We have descended from the Infinite into the finite.Yoga 
is withdrawal of the attention from externals in order to focus 
it on the inner source of Truth. Only in this way can we dis-
cover how  God has condensed His consciousness  into  the 
multitudinous finite forms of His creatures and the universes 
they inhabit. The human body is the most intricate of all His 
creations. A single original cell, the united sperm and ovum, 
divides,- and by multiplication of the process builds up trillions 
of cells around itself to create the bodily temple that houses 
our divine soul consciousness. 
You don't realize how much energy is locked in even one 
little gram of flesh. Its release would spread countless electrons 
far into space. * And the power and extent of the consciousness 
that  is  present  in  the  body  is  beyond  human  conception. 
Though externally we are made of flesh, behind its gross cells 
are electrical currents, life currents. And behind these subtle 
energies are the thoughts and perceptions. 
Thought is inexhaustible. Since the world began, thoughts 
in unimaginable numbers have passed through the ether. One 
could not begin to count them, but it is possible to get some 
idea if you reflect  on how many thoughts and feelings  you 
express during your own lifetime. Millions! Try to remember all 
you have thought in just one year, or even in one day. Consider 
the accumulation of thoughts of every human being through 
unrecorded ages past. God knows them all! 
Mind cannot measure even the subtle phenomena of na-
ture. How many electrons whirl in the electricity that flows 
* The awesome power of the release of nuclear energy was first demonstrated 
under controlled conditions within a few years after this talk, when the first 
atomic bomb was exploded at Alamogordo, New Mexico, on July 16, 1945. 

THE INFINITE NATURE  OF GOD  23 
into the light bulbs here in  the  chapel?  Trillions,  dancing 
together, make this light you behold. These ultramicroscopic 
particles are moving at a speed equivalent to travelling from 
here to New York, or to any other part of the world, in a few 
seconds. Scientific experiments are proving this. 
If you try to calculate how many protons and electrons are 
condensed in our earth, the mind goes only so far and then 
stops. What is revealed to the searching mind seems infinite, 
but there is a point beyond which ideas become too subtle to 
follow. From that sphere where the mind cannot  penetrate, 
God is pouring forth His essential Light—the Cosmic Intelli-
gent Vibration that structures finite creation. 
God's True Nature Known Only Through Intuition 
If we use the mind properly, we can understand how God 
is beyond mind and intellect; and how His true nature can be 
felt only through the soul's power of intuition. We must find 
His consciousness through the superconscious mind—the nu-
cleus of mind and intelligence. His infinite nature is revealed 
to man through the intuitive superconsciousness of the soul. 
The joy felt in meditation reveals the presence of Eternal Joy 
spread over all creation. The light seen in meditation is the 
astral light*  from which our tangible creation is made. Be-
holding this light, one feels a unity with all things. 
The ordinary person lives in the world but is relatively 
unconscious of its nature and purpose. A life of such limited 
perception is not unlike that of the animals. We used to have 
here at Mt. Washington a goat that was invariably attracted by 
my voice. One day, while I was speaking in this chapel, the 
goat came trotting in and right on up the aisle to me! I am sure 
it didn't know what I was saying; it simply liked to hear my 
voice. But you come to these lectures not only to listen to the 
words, but also to feel the presence of God behind them. If you 
attune your consciousness with His consciousness, and remain 
in that current of bliss, you will feel at-onement with Him. 
Whatever understanding I have attained has been acquired by 
* Everything on the material plane has a counterpart made of astral light, a 
light that is more subtle than the electromagnetic energies of the atom. Hindu 
scriptures called this energy pianOj which Paramahansa Yogananda has trans-
lated as "lifetrons."  / 

24  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
becoming attuned to God's consciousness within. This you too 
can accomplish. 
As one develops spiritually and realized his kinship with 
all that lives, his responsibility to share the suffering of oth-
ers increases. Jesus was willing even to suffer in sharing the 
afflictions of others,- we too must do what we can for those 
who are shivering with cold and disease. It is a nightmare for 
them;  and whatever  of their woes  we can  remove,  we  are 
removing them  from God also. He is not happy when  His 
children are in misery, for He suffers in them. 
At  this  moment  most  of you are enjoying beauty  and 
peace, but think of those in Louisville today! Thousands are 
suffering there because of the floods.  Once  long ago I was 
thinking how wonderful America  is, without  the  disasters 
that afflict so many countries; then God showed me the floods 
that are occurring now. The vibrations of the thoughts*  and 
feelings of thousands being killed in the fighting in Spain have 
caused atmospheric  changes  that  are responsible  for  these 
floods and other disasters around the world. War spews out 
vibrations of wrong that throw all nature out of balance and 
harmony, causing "natural"  catastrophes. 
God gave freedom  to  man,  and man  has  misused  that 
freedom; this is the cause of all suffering. The misuse of our 
God-given free will has terrifying consequences. I would rather 
someone tell me that I am about to do wrong, than allow me 
to act and not wake up until years later to the harm I had done. 
Satan Created Ignorance, Cause of All Suffering 
Suffering is therefore not the work of God, but of Satan's 
power of maya,  delusion. This force creates the ignorance that 
* The power of thought, for good or ill, derives from the thought-essence of 
the universe. In manifesting creation, God first projects it as thought-patterns, 
the finest form of creative vibration, which condenses into forms of astral light 
and then into grosser atomic structures. Remove the primal thought of God 
and creation dissolves. Man's thoughts are a microcosmic borrowing from 
God's thought power and so have the ability, even when undeveloped, to af-
fect significantly his own health, happiness, and success and, when strongly 
reinforced by kindred thoughts of others, the world in which he lives. The 
thought-patterns implanted in creation by God are thus affected harmoniously 
or inharmoniously by the thoughts of mankind. (See karma in glossary.) 

THE INFINITE NATURE  OF GOD  25 
blinds people to the consequences of their actions,  causing 
them to err and thus bring suffering upon themselves. Those 
who are fighting in Spain—both the government forces and 
their opponents—think they are trying to do right. The only 
way to avoid error is to develop the discriminative wisdom to 
know what is wrong, and then resolve not to do it. One wrong 
fighting another wrong doesn't make a right. The true enemy 
of man is ignorance. It must be driven from this earth. 
We have everything necessary in the world today to bring 
about the millennium. Only man's selfishness makes it im-
possible.  Tremendous  unnecessary  suffering  is  created  by 
man's shortsighted self-interest. Money that could feed and 
clothe needy people is used instead for destruction. The root 
cause of the world's troubles is this selfishness born of igno-
rance. Each person thinks he is doing right; but when he seeks 
to satisfy only his own interest, he is setting in motion  the 
karmic law* of cause and effect that will inevitably destroy his 
own and others' happiness. 
The more I see of world tragedies caused by man's igno-
rance, the more I realize that even if every street were paved 
with gold, happiness would not be lasting. Happiness lifcs in 
making others happy, in forsaking self-interest to bring joy to 
others. If each one would do that, then everyone would be 
happy; and all would be taken care of. This is what Jesus meant 
when  he  said:  "All  things  whatsoever  ye would  that  men 
should do to you, do ye even so to them."+ 
A federation of all religions and all nations is necessary. 
But such a union will come only when every individual engages 
in that meditation which leads to direct contact with God. 
Communion with Him is the solution. When one has realized 
God, he no longer feels that others are different from himself. 
Unless such wisdom comes, not to just a few, but to all men, 
there will be no freedom on earth. Even here in America free-
dom is not total; suffering still abounds. Each one of us has a 
responsibility to bring peace and happiness to our country and 
to all men. One should care, not only for his own nation, but 
* Karma is the law of action and reaction. Whatever man sows by his behaviour 
he will reap in like measure, in this life or in succeeding ones. (See glossary.) 
+ Matthew  7:12. 

26  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
all  countries;  not  only  for  one's  own  family,  but  for  all 
mankind. The ordinary man's interest is limited to himself and 
his surroundings, but the man of God identifies with the whole 
world. Don't think the contribution made by your spiritualized 
consciousness is small. Your part may mean very much. 
In order to know God you must become like Him. In spite 
of our transgressions, in spite of our forgetfulness of God and 
great indifference to Him, still He lovingly gives us life and all 
that supports life in this world. Nothing is greater than God; 
indifference to Him is the highest sin. 
Those who are not willing to give up all they have to find 
Him, will not know Him. Whoever would know God must be 
able to forsake all else for Him. Jesus was trying to make his 
disciples understand this truth when he told them to keep 
watch and pray with him at Gethsemane. But when they fell 
asleep, he sadly observed: "The spirit indeed is willing, but the 
flesh is weak."* 
Man is like a puppet. The strings of his habits, emotions, 
passions, and senses make him dance to their bidding. They 
bind his soul. He who is unwilling or unable to cut himself free 
in order to know God will not find Him. I see myself apart 
from these attachments.  I eat, and sometimes I don't eat; I 
sleep,  and sometimes  I don't  sleep.  I gave up all  physical 
necessities to prove to myself that I do not need them. God 
doesn't eat or sleep,- He isn't bound by senses and habits. This 
is what makes Him God; and we are made in His image. We 
should be able to give up everything to know Him: "Seek ye 
the kingdom of God; and all these things shall be added unto 
you."t Despite all the tests I have gone through for Him, in the 
end God has given me everything I wanted or needed of this 
world. And I have given it all back, for He has bestowed on me 
a gift infinitely greater: Divine Joy, day and night. In that Joy 
all desires that come into my heart are satisfied. 
Meditation Lifts the Fog of Ignorance 
In the Bhagavad Gita, recorded by Sage Vyasa, Lord Krishna 
explains that if your innate wisdom is covered over with igno-
* Matthew  26:41. 
t Luke  12:31 (Bible). 

THE INFINITE NATURE  OF GOD  27 
ranee, you are deluded and thus stumble through life: "Tamasic 
[ignorant] action is that which is instituted through delusion, 
without measuring one's ability, and disregarding the conse-
quences—loss to oneself of health, wealth, and influence, and 
harm to others."*  When the fog of ignorance is removed by 
meditation you will see the. right path. You will be troubled no 
more; you will find fulfillment eternal. "Verily, nothing else in 
this world is as sanctifying as wisdom. In due course of time, 
the devotee who is successful in yoga [meditation] will spon-
taneously realize this within his Self."t 
These truths are all real to me. Truth is Reality. Self-real-
ization is not something one can learn from books; it comes 
only through personal experience. Realization of truth, experi-
ence  of  God—not  dogma  merely—is  what  every  religion 
should bring to its followers. What Jesus Christ realized, we 
too must experience. He didn't teach that his followers should 
worship him as a personality, but rathe/experience what he ex-
perienced in his oneness with God.-That can be attained only 
by meditation and by following God's laws. To worship Jesus 
because he is Jesus is not enough. Embrace the universal ideals 
he taught, and strive to be like him. 
We are here on earth in this particular body-form for just 
a little while, to learn our lessons and move on. Whither are 
we headed now? Think how many pages have already been 
turned in the Lord's dream novel of creation! When I visited 
Salt Lake City I saw in vision a great ocean, and mammoths 
walking on the shore. Later I learned that the skeleton of an 
ancient mammoth had recently been found there. 
As human beings we have God-given power to cast away 
every  habit  and  limitation  and  spread  our  consciousness 
throughout creation, penetrating not only the hearts of all crea-
tures, but reaching out beyond the stars. Our native vastness 
encompasses even greater space. Such tremendous possibility 
lies within us! We are infinite! I live in that sphere of infinity, 
and am conscious of the body only once in a while. 
You are limited now; but when by deep, daily meditation 
you become able to transfer your consciousness from the finite 
* xvni:25. 
t Ibid. IV:38. 

28  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
to the Infinite, you will be free. You are not meant to be a pris-
oner of the body. You are a child of God; you must live up to 
that divine birthright. 
Give God First Place in Your Heart 
Wherever your mind is, that is where you will spend your 
time. What if God had not given you the power to play or read 
or work? You could do nothing. So He should come first in your 
life. God knows what is in your heart; give Him first place there. 
The only way to catch God is by love. Meditate upon Him, 
and then deeply pray: "Lord, I cannot live without You. You are 
the Power behind my consciousness. I love You. Reveal Your-
self to me." When you give up sleep to meditate upon Him, 
when you forsake selfishness and cry because of His suffering 
in your brothers, He comes to you. When you actually sacrifice 
for Him, He is caught in the net of your love. Nothing else can 
capture Him. 
Knowledge prepares the way to love. You cannot love that 
which you do not know. Knowledge of God must therefore pre-
cede love for Him. This knowledge comes with practice of 
Kriya Yoga, * the technique that Lahiri Mahasaya gave. When 
you know God, you will love Him; and when you love Him, 
you will surrender yourself to Him. 
Until your devotion for God and awareness of Him become 
complete, don't rest; don't give in to sleep when you should be 
meditating. Never give anything preference before God! His 
love is the greatest love there is. So long as you let other things 
come first, He will wait. But your delay may be too long, and 
your suffering may be great. Don't procrastinate. Be certain in 
the sincerity of your conscience that you have made the effort 
to commune with Him. Don't rest, don't give up until you can 
see Him with your own eyes, or feel Him in your heart. Birth, 
play, marriage, children, old age—life is finished. That is not 
living! Life is much deeper and more wonderful than that, I 
have found. When you know God, there is no more sorrow. All 
* Kriya Yoga means union (yoga) with the Infinite through a certain action or 
rite {kriya). Specifically, it is a meditation technique through which the divine 
union can be realized. Lahiri Mahasaya, guru of Paramahansa  Yogananda's 
guru, played a key role in the revival in this age of the ancient Kriya Yoga sci-
ence. (See glossary; see also Autobiography  of a Yogi, chapter 26.) 

THE INFINITE NATURE  OF GOD  29 
those you loved and lost in death are with you again in the 
Eternal Life. You don't know whom to consider your  "own" 
anymore, because everyone is yours. 
The beauty of God is vast. To enjoy flowers for their love-
liness is good, but far greater is to see behind their purity and 
beauty the face of God. To be carried away by music for its own 
sake cannot compare with hearing God's creative Voice in it. 
Though God is immanent in the finite beauties of creation, it is 
wisdom to realize one's eternal Self beyond form and finitude. 
You know how fond I am of our grounds at the Mount Wash-
ington and Encinitas ashrams.*  I never tire of their beauty. But 
the Lord gave me an awakening experience recently. I inwardly 
saw people sitting about and talking. One of them proposed 
some activity, but another said, "No, Paramahansaji  taught 
that we must not do that." I suddenly realized that this was a 
vision of years to come, after I was no longer here is this body. 
For a moment  I was shaken;  then I came back to  ordinary 
consciousness. 
There is no use in becoming attached to anything in this 
world.  So  many  things  come  and go in  the  Lord's  cosmic 
drama. I see airfields destroyed, and the sea filled with dead, 
and many other things to come. In my heart I see a world with-
out me. That freedom God gives ultimately to every soul. 
One great saint said, "I care not where I may be, O Lord, 
but punish me not with obliviousness of Thee." There is not 
greater punishment. Jesus said: "It is better for thee to enter 
into life mailed."+ All suffering can be taken away by the con-
tact of God.
  y 
Awake from the Nightmare of Suffering 
In a dream you may see yourself running down a street, 
pursued by an enemy. Suddenly you are shot, and you think, 
"Oh, how terrible! I am dying! I am sad to leave this world." 
* Mt. Washington Ashram Centre is the international headquarters of Self-
Realization Fellowship, located on Mt. Washington in Los Angeles.  The 
Ashram Centre in Encinitas, California, is a branch of Self-Realization Fel-
lowship. 
+ Mark  9:43. I.e., mafmed of all desires and habits that prevent man from 
thinking of God.  ' 

30  MAN'S ETERNAL QUEST 
Then you see yourself dead. The undertaker cremates your 
body, and your friends come to mourn when the ashes are laid 
away. But suddenly you wake up and see that it was only a 
dream. You are alive! This is similar to what happens at death. 
God showed me in a vision that those who are dying in the 
fighting in Spain are only dreaming a terrible dream of death. 
As soon as their consciousness is lifted from the body, they 
awake as from a nightmare, and are glad to be free of it. Our 
life experiences are all part of a dream. Man himself has cre-
ated the nightmare of war. But after its victims have been 
thrown from their bodies, they realize it was only a horrible 
dream from which they have awakened. They know they are 
not dead. This is a great metaphysical truth. 
If you know you are dreaming, you don't suffer from your 
bad experiences in the dream. But if you are identified with the 
dream, and in it someone strikes your head and kills you, that 
dream death seems a true and terrible experience until you 
wake up and understand it was not real. It is the same after 
death. Once you are out of this body, you realize you are not 
dead; you are free of a nightmare. So death is not the end; it is 
a freeing of the consciousness from imprisonment in the phys-
ical dream-body. That release brings a sense of great freedom. 
We should never seek death. Rather, we should prepare our 
consciousness by meditation and God-communion,  so that 
when death comes, in its own time, we are able to look upon 
it as a dream, nothing more. I can see the dream nature of life 
and death anytime I wish. Hence I attach little importance to 
this body. 
In Oneness with God Know That Life Is a Dream 
Live in the consciousness of Spirit, in that oneness with 
God wherein you know that life is a dream. It is very easy to 
do when you make the effort. When suffering comes it is more 
difficult to detach your consciousness from identification with 
the body,- so be wise and make the effort now, while you have 
strength and health. 
Material desires take away the desire for the Infinite. Every 
day or so someone tells me I need this or that. It seems ridicu-
lous, because I know that thousands do not have what I am 

THE INFINITE NATURE OF GOD  31 
told I "need." If they don't need it, why should I? Your only real 
need is God; there is no other necessity. Be not attached to pos-
sessions, music, books, food, or any other sense pleasures. In 
God you have eternal life. Become aware of this great truth; 
otherwise your appointments in life will take over, and you 
will die still bound by them. If you are one with Him, you are 
not compelled to return to this dream earth again. You are free 
to come and go as you like, * to serve God in His children on 
earth. 
If you live in the joy of God, you will not know what death 
is. You do not get to that state when you pray mechanically. 
Become completely absorbed in your prayer, with faith that 
God is listening. If you thus fervently, lovingly pray to God, He 
will come to you at any time. 
* The doctrine of reincarnation provides the only plausible explanation for the 
seeming injustices in inequalities among men—all of whom are God's beloved 
children. The soul, all-perfect and ever-perfect, is compelled by the law of evo-
lution to incarnate repeatedly in progressively higher lives—retarded by wrong 
actions and desires and accelerated by spiritual endeavours—until Self-realiza-
tion and God-union are attained. Having then transcended the Lord's delusion, 
the soul is forever freed. "Their thoughts immersed in That (Spirit), their souls 
one with Spirit, their sole allegiance and devotion given to Spirit, their beings 
purified from poisonous delusion by the antidote of wisdom—such men reach 
the state of nonreturn" (Bhagavad Gita V: 17). In the Bible it is similarly writ-
ten: "Him that overcometh will I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and 
he shall go no more out" (Revelation 3:12). A soul who returns to earth after 
attaining liberation, incarnates of his own free will as a master, to help liber-
ate others. Such voluntary returns are called vyutthana,  reversion to earthly 
life after maya has ceased to blind. Such incarnations are rare in any age. 

