130  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
great Spirit you are enjoying everything, but without  attach-
ment. Therefore it is worthwhile to make the effort to know 
Him. Otherwise life can horribly disillusion you. 
When I went back to India in 1935,1 was looking forward 
to visiting some of the places I had enjoyed as a child, but upon 
my arrival I saw everything had changed. The stage was differ-
ently set. The greatest disillusionment came to me when I vis-
ited my old home in Ichapur, where I used to play and watch 
the birds. I was shocked. Only one remembered tree was left. 
That is the way life is; one by one, things familiar and dear van-
ish from our sight. I would have given anything then to have 
seen our home as it was in my childhood. Nevertheless I did 
see it later, materialized in a vision: we swam in the pond, and 
I went upstairs in the house and lay on the bed and ate man-
goes, as I had done so many years before. 
Scrutinize your desires carefully now. Sort them and keep 
only good ones; and let not even those good desires choke off 
the one important desire, for Cod. That must not be stifled. 
You are in great delusion when you ask God for fulfillment of 
your earthly desires and never ask Him to make a gift of Him-
self to you. What would you think of a son who says, "Mother, 
write a check for me," whenever he wants anything, but oth-
erwise gives no thought to her? Don't be like that; never be 
ungrateful. 
When this book of life shall be closed, there will remain 
with you only the realization gained from those desires you 
have fulfilled in connection with God. So read from Whispers* 
and then meditate before you go to bed each night. When you 
wake up, think of God. Pray not only before taking food, but 
when you are eating, and afterward. When you are working, 
weave the thought of God around that activity. When you are 
in touch with God, you will see all your desires mysteriously 
fulfilled. But you must seek Him first. He has given you every-
thing; but only if you forsake all His gifts, preferring Him, will 
He surrender Himself. When you show God that you are will-
* Whispers from Eternity,  a book of spiritualized prayers by Paramahansa 
Yogananda. A spiritualized prayer is one to which God has responded. Any 
devotee praying deeply and sincerely to Him in those same words will receive 
a similar blessing. (Publisher's  Note) 

THE DESIRE THAT SATISFIES ALL DESIRES  131 
ing to sacrifice everything to know Him, He will come to you. 
Carry a Portable Heaven Within 
The hardest obstacle to overcome is yourself. When you sit 
to meditate at night, your nervousness and restlessness are still 
with you. Learn to control your mind and body. Be king of 
yourself. Carry within you a portable heaven, and in life or in 
death, in heaven or in hades, that inner heaven will be with 
you. Pray deeply, sincerely, "O God, I yearn to know You. You 
must answer me!" and next morning pray again, "Lord, You 
must come to me!" and pray again the next night in the same 
way, in the language of your heart; if you keep on, He must re-
spond. But when you pray halfheartedly, while thinking in the 
back of your mind about something else, He knows He is not 
first with you, and He does not respond. 
Have God first. Have God now. Don't wait, because delu-
sion is very strong. Before you know it, the time will have 
come for you to quit this world. Whenever you have a mo-
ment, sit down and meditate. No matter how many times your 
prayers have not been answered, don't worry; keep on praying. 
Pray with sincerity. Believe that your prayer is answered. 
In my life I have seen the most wonderful demonstrations 
of God's response to prayer. I urge you to pray not for little 
things, but for His presence. Only that prayer is worthwhile. If 
you are willing to sacrifice an hour or two of sleep for medita-
tion every night, you will enter the kingdom of God. Don't 
watch the time. With deep sincerity pray, "Lord, I want You 
alone." Bad habits and restlessness will try to shake you from 
your effort, but keep your mind on God and you will find His 
presence with you. 
Desires for wordly joys create the magnetic attraction that 
draws man back to earth, life after life. Reincarnation is no 
longer necessary for those who have fulfilled their desires in 
God. Whenever they want to fulfill any wish, they  simply 
think of that object and it is materialized before them. My 
mother appeared before me in flesh and blood, just as I see you 
here. How kind is God, how marvellous is God! that He mate-
rializes the objects of our desires to show us His love and grate-
fulness when we have given Him first place in our hearts. 

132  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
To be able to demonstrate health or wealth or power or 
friends with God's help is fine, but if you can coax God Him-
self to respond to your prayers, you are a man of destiny. So 
don't rest until you demonstrate God in your life. He will give 
you everything you ever wished for; and He will test you. The 
tests in the spiritual life are greater than in any other. But you 
who pass His tests shall say: "Lord, my greatest prayer has 
been answered. What else could my heart want or need, but 
You?" 

In God Is All Happiness 
Self-Realization Fellowship Hermitage, 
Encinitas, California, June 10, 1937 
God in His infinite mercy gives to us His joy, His inspira-
tion, true life, true wisdom, true happiness, and true under-
standing through all the various experiences of our lives. But 
the glory of God is revealed only in the quietness of the soul, 
in the intensity of the inner effort of the mind to  commune 
with Him. It is there that we find truth. Outside, delusion is 
very strong; very few people can get away from the influences 
of outer environment.  The world goes on with its  infinite 
complexities  and diverse experiences. Each life is new and 
each life has to be lived differently. Yet underlying all life is 
the silent voice of God, ever calling to us through  flowers, 
through scriptures, and through our conscience—through  all 
things that are beautiful and that make life worth living. 
The more you concentrate on the outside, the less you 
will know of the inner glory of the everlasting joy of Spirit. 
The more you concentrate within, the less you will have of 
difficulties without. But most people do not understand  this 
truth because of the influence of worldly company and envi-
ronment, and bad habits. Environment keeps you more or less 
engrossed; it never allows you to think of deeper  realities. 
Even in this beautiful place in Encinitas I have seen that some 
students came without the pure intention of seeking spiritual 
development. If you choose to see God you can see Him every-
where. Habits are predatory; they destroy. You should learn to 
be happy with what you have. Don't wish for anything more 
than what is already coming to you. The Father knows what 
you need. 
The best way to be unendingly happy is to be conscious of 
the Father. Your paramount desire should be God-realization,-
133 

134  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
the determination to be with Him should be supreme in your 
consciousness. 
I have given everything to God. There is nothing else that 
I can give anymore. And I have already realized that the only 
purpose of life is to know God. Many people may doubt that 
finding God is the purpose of life; but everyone can accept the 
idea that the purpose of life is to find happiness. I say that God 
is Happiness. He is Bliss. He is Love. He is Joy that will never 
go away from your soul. So why shouldn't you try to acquire 
that Happiness?  No one else can give it to you. You must 
continuously cultivate it yourself. The forces of nature are 
constantly trying to give you the pleasures of the world, but 
such transitory satisfactions only end in sorrow and bitter-
ness. Even the most favoured person, one who appears to have 
everything, may not be happy. And you will never be satisfied 
for long with earthly things. They give only a false peace and 
contentment. The whole world has been plunged into chaos 
through greedy desires. Greed is creating war. Nothing else is 
causing it. 
He who conquers himself is the greatest victor in this bat-
tle of life. Money, fame, desires—everything that goes against 
this ideal is a detriment to our peace and happiness. If people 
would only learn to concentrate on the real values of life, they 
would find true happiness; but they are carried away by earthly 
desires. I find that no temptation can make me deviate from the 
path I have chosen. I could enthrall thousands with the powers 
God has given me, but that course would be a detriment to me, 
and in any case I do not seek to enthrall thousands. I love to see 
true devotees—those who are anchored in God. Souls who love 
God will come here, and those whose enthusiasm will last to 
the end of life will find Him. 
God Must Come to Those Who Truly Want Him 
It is impossible to deceive the Lord because He is sitting 
right behind your thoughts, and knows what you are thinking 
and desiring. If in your heart you truly renounce the world and 
seek inner communion with Him, He will come to you. But 
you must know that you want Him and nothing else.  Once 
that desire for Him is established in your heart, He must come. 

IN GOD IS ALL HAPPINESS  135 
The only thing to live for is the contact of the Divine, the 
communion with God. That is why Jesus said, "The harvest 
truly is plenteous but the labourers are few."*  Believe  the 
words of Jesus, who lived truth. Has there ever been a greater 
example of godliness for us than when he said, "Father, forgive 
them, for they know not what they do"?t 
Everybody wants to have more money than the next per-
son, and when he has it he is not satisfied, because he finds 
there is still someone else who has more than he. People live 
in a bedlam of misery, created by their own desires. Learn to be 
satisfied with what you have. The average person in America 
has much more than the average person in Europe or India, or 
in any other land. But still he is not happy! He is burning with 
anxieties and worries. 
God's way is the easiest way. It is best to go to the Father 
first and ask Him what is best for you. When you know that He 
is, and that He awaits you, why should you waste your time on 
lesser things? Have you ever tried sincerely to see if the Father 
talks to you or not? The Lord is speaking to all human beings. 
What more can He do to attract your attention? 
I don't want people to think that they can attain realization 
simply by listening to others or by reading books. They must 
practise what they read and hear. It is better to go to church 
than to stay at home and listen to idle chatter, but even in 
church you must feel Him within, and you must know the 
technique by which you can realize His presence. Emotionalism 
and intellectualism cannot give realization. 
When you resign yourself completely to God, when you 
are never tempted to pray for selfish ends, and when you are 
sure that God is your spirit, that He is your soul and everything 
else—then you are free. 
Think! A few decades hence, this existence of ours will 
have become a dream; and my sitting here and talking with 
you will have become part of that dream. All the great mas-
ters of the past have become dreams in the consciousness of 
mankind. But those great ones have attained. They are always 
conscious of what is going on. 
* Matthew 9:37.  t Luke  23:34. 

136  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
What a dream this life is! And yet, when you look at your 
body now and see how it throbs with life, you become fully 
convinced again of the reality of this dream. You think you 
must have this or that and then you can be happy. But no mat-
ter how many of your desires are satisfied, you will never find 
happiness through them. The more you have, the more you 
want. Learn to live simply. "His mind is full with contentment 
whose desires ever flow inward. That man is like a changeless 
ocean which is kept brimful with constantly entering waters. 
He is not a muni  who bores holes of desires in his reservoir of 
peace and lets the waters escape."* 
Seek God in Solitude 
You need to be guided by those who know God, those who 
commune with Him. Jesus taught us to seek God in solitude.t 
In the solitude of inner silence you learn about the Holy Ghost. 
The great masters of India also speak of this divine power. The 
true meaning of the Holy Ghost has first come in this land 
through Self-Realization Fellowship. Everything in creation is 
vibration, which is guided by the intelligence of God.  That 
intelligent  vibration  is the Holy Ghost.$  Everyone  should 
learn how to contact the Holy Ghost through meditation; Self-
Realization [Yogoda Satsanga] teaches you how. 
In the silence of your soul, in the bower of your concen-
* Bhagavad Gita 11:70. The true muni  is a monk who observes spiritual silence 
(mauna), by controlling the waves of thoughts and feelings that are ceaselessly 
in motion during ordinary consciousness. 
t "But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet (the inner silence of med-
itation^ and when thou hast shut thy door (to the noisy senses), pray to thy 
Father which is in secret (within you); and thy Father which seeth in secret 
shall reward thee openly" (Matthew 6:6). 
t The outward, active manifestation of the omnipresent Christ Consciousness, 
its "witness" in creation (Revelation  3:14). Holy Ghost is also referred to in 
the Bible as "the Word" [John 1:1) and "the Comforter" [John 14:26), and in 
Hindu scriptures as "Aum." This invisible divine power is the only doer, the 
sole causative and activating force that upholds all creation through vibration. 
Through a special yoga meditation technique, taught by Yogoda Satsanga So-
ciety of India, the adept communes with the Holy Ghost, the blissful Com-
forter: "The Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send 
in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your re-
membrance, whatsoever I have said unto you" (John 14:26). 

IN GOD IS ALL HAPPINESS  137 
tration, the romance with the Infinite is endless. But you can-
not have God and mammon* together. You must give yourself 
to God wholly. He is the Eternal Lover, and He is begging for 
the love of you all. 
You must learn to use your will and concentration in or-
der to seek God wholeheartedly. Your actions are dictated by 
your habits. You are always being forced by habits to do things 
that you don't want to do. You are your own enemy and you 
don't know it. You don't learn to sit quietly. You don't learn to 
give time to God. And you are impatient and expect to attain 
heaven all at once. You cannot get it by reading books or by 
listening to sermons or by doing charitable works. You can get 
God only by giving your time to Him in deep meditation. 
Look to God Alone 
You must make the effort to please God first. It is impos-
sible to please all. I try never to displease anybody. I do my best 
and that is all I can do. My first aim is to please God. I use my 
hands to pray in adoration before Him, my feet to seek Him 
everywhere, my mind to think of Him as always present. Every 
throne of thought must be occupied by God—God as peace, 
God as love, God as kindness, God as understanding, God as 
compassion, God as wisdom. This is the only thing that I have 
come to tell you. Naught else. 
Learn the Self-Realization [Yogoda Satsanga] technique of 
meditation. Keep good company. Don't look to others, but to 
God alone. And every day speak of this work to others. Every 
day do good to some people. As long as there is money in my 
pocket I never cease to give. My bank is God. 
Last of all, you must know God, just as the great ones 
know Him. If you follow the technique, you will find Him 
through your own efforts. 
One day I was walking outside the hermitage, thinking of 
my great guru, Sri Yukteswarji, and wondering about him. I felt 
sad that I was enjoying this beautiful ashram and that he could 
not be here to share it with me. Suddenly he appeared to me in 
the sky and said, "You think you are the only one enjoying this 
place! I am enjoying it from all space." 
* Matthew 6:24 (Bible). 

138  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
You must strive to be one with God. Practise meditation 
every day and learn to love Him deeply, and to love your neigh-
bors as yourself. This is the only way to avoid war. There must 
be spiritual cooperation. Without spirituality there cannot be 
happiness, either national or individual. And happiness must 
start with the individual. God-communion is the only answer 
to all problems, whether they be physical, financial, matrimo-
nial, moral, or spiritual. 
Happiness comes by feeling that you are one with God— 
that you are the child of God—a prince child of the King of the 
Universe. You are not a beggar child. You have jailed yourself 
in the body because of ignorance of your Father. You must free 
yourself from this jail. You must keep your mind riveted to 
God no matter what comes. Then you will find great peace and 
joy. "Their thoughts fully on Me, their beings surrendered to 
Me, enlightening one another, proclaiming Me always, My 
devotees are contented and joyful."* 
* Bhagavad Gita X:9. 

How to Be More Likable 
First Self-Realization Fellowship Temple at 
Encinitas, California, August 20, 1939 
Some persons are born with a likable nature; everyone is 
attracted to them. Some are never liked. Others are neither 
liked nor disliked; they are just ignored. Why? Impartial God 
is not responsible for the uneven distribution  of  attractive 
qualities. The differences in each man's character are of his 
own cultivation. He himself has created those pleasant or un-
pleasant qualities, in this or in past lives. It would be a great 
injustice if God were responsible for starting off some children 
with the advantage of likable good qualities and others with a 
handicap of obnoxious bad qualities. But it is not He who has 
established bad tendencies in some children and good in oth-
ers,- therefore we cannot hold God accountable. 
God creates all men equal, made in His image. In order to 
see the justification of man's seeming inequalities, we must 
understand the law of reincarnation.  Knowledge of this law 
was buried and forgotten during the Dark Ages. Jesus spake of 
reincarnation when he said: "Elias is come already, and they 
knew him not.... Then the disciples understood that he spoke 
unto them of John the Baptist."* The soul appearing in one in-
carnation as Elias (Elijah) had returned in another incarnation 
as John the Baptist. 
There would be no meaning to life if it did not afford us 
sufficient opportunities to develop our potentials and satisfy 
our desires. Without reincarnation, how does the divine jus-
tice operate for those souls who have no chance to  express 
themselves because they are encased in the body of a baby that 
is born dead, or of one that perhaps lives only to the age of six? 
Those souls could hardly be condemned to Hades,  because 
* Matthew  17:12-13. 
139 

140  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
they have done nothing to deserve punishment; nor could they 
go to heaven, having had no opportunity to earn it. The an-
swer is that this earth is a vast schoolhouse, and the law of 
reincarnation is the justice that brings each man here again 
and again until he has learned all of life's lessons. Lord Krishna 
referred to this truth: "By diligently following his path, the 
yogi, perfected by the efforts of many births, is purged of sin 
(karmic taint) and finally enters the Supreme Beatitude."* 
Man himself has cultivated his bright and dark qualities. 
Somewhere, sometime, in this or other lives, the seeds were 
planted by his own actions. If he permits the seeds of harmful 
acts to grow, they will crowd out the seeds of good that he has 
sown. The wise cast out the seeds of evil from the garden of 
life. 
Attractiveness Comes from Within 
One should learn to analyse himself and others to deter-
mine why some persons are liked by all and others are not. 
Even among children we find some whom everyone regards af-
fectionately and others whom everyone avoids. One of the first 
conclusions from such analysis is that if a person is to become 
likable, he must make himself more attractive from within. 
Sometimes even the most physically attractive person may be 
repellent because of the inner ugliness reflected in his speech 
and actions. 
At one time the secret of popularity was supposed to be 
"it," a kind of physical appeal and magnetism. But having "it" 
does not necessarily make one likable. Our good or bad traits 
determine whether, and by whom, we are liked or disliked. 
Evil attracts  evil; good attracts good. "It"  is not what  we 
should want, but the kind of magnetism that will draw good 
to us, that will bring sincere friends and merited admiration. 
Can externals such as clothes and a pretty or handsome face 
give us this kind of attractiveness?  No. It has to be created 
within. 
Avoid moodiness. There is no unpleasantness  in being 
grave,- but your expression is quite different when you are in-
dulging in a dark mood. Your face is a mirror that reveals every 
* Bhagavad Gita VI:45. 

HOW TO BE MORE LIKABLE  141 
change of feeling. Your thoughts and emotions, like waves, ebb 
and flow in the facial muscles, continuously altering your ap-
pearance. Everyone you meet sees and reacts to these facial ex-
pressions of what you are inwardly thinking and feeling. You 
can fairly well control your eyes and your smile, and thus con-
ceal your feelings from some,- but not from all. Lincoln rightly 
said, "It is true that you may fool all the people some of the 
time,- you can even fool some of the people all the time,- but 
you can't fool all of the people all the time." 
In our eyes is the entire history of our life. It cannot be 
concealed from those who know how to read it. There are 
spiritual eyes, half-spiritual eyes, dishonest  eyes,  sensual 
eyes. What one does is written  there. If I were to  analyse 
what I see in a person's eyes, he would be astonished at my 
accuracy. 
Never do anything that taints your mind. Wrong actions 
cause negative or evil mental vibrations that are reflected in 
your whole appearance and personality. Engage in those actions 
and thoughts that nurture the good qualities you want to have. 
If you conduct yourself in accord with the truths I am telling 
you, you will find your life beautifully different. 
You Are Judged Largely by the Way You Conduct Yourself 
One is judged somewhat by his dress, but largely by the 
way he conducts himself. Always be clean and trim in appear-
ance. Avoid overdressing: fussy clothes and accessories make 
one look like a museum piece! Clothe yourself simply and 
neatly, and as befits your personality. But first of all learn good 
behaviour. Once you have developed your mind and cultivated 
appealing inner virtues, dress becomes less important. 
Mahatma Gandhi has proved that clothes alone do not 
"make the man." He wears* only a loincloth, by way of iden-
tifying himself with the simple masses of India. There he once 
arrived thus clad for a party that was being given by an English 
governor. The servants would not let him in. He  returned 
home and sent a package by messenger to the governor. It con-
tained a suit. The governor called him at his home and asked 
the meaning of the package. The great man replied: "I was 
* Gandhi was still living when Paramahansaji gave this talk. (Publisher's Note) 

142  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
invited to your party, but I wasn't allowed entrance because of 
my dress,- therefore I have sent my suit instead." The governor 
of course insisted that he come. Even in London Gandhi went 
to call on the King and Queen of England clad only in his loin-
cloth. He had transcended the clothes personality. Now I am 
not recommending this mode of dress! Gandhi has a mission 
to fulfill, and this is a part of his role. If one becomes as great 
as Gandhi, he also may do as he sees fit. 
The point is, one should not think all the time about the 
body; nor should he be careless of it. To give the body too lit-
tle or too much attention makes one become unbalanced, fa-
natical. Look after the body in a reasonable way, and remem-
ber always what is most important—your  mentality,  your 
behaviour. Give more attention to the mind, the springboard of 
your behaviour, for that is what most persons respond to. 
When with Others, Be Sincere and Thoughtful 
Be interested in others. When you are by yourself you have 
a right to think and do what you want to; but when you are 
with others, you should not be absentminded or uninterested. 
The company of a corpse would be preferable to that of an ab-
sentminded person; the indifference of a corpse bears no insult. 
When you are in the company of others, be with them whole-
heartedly; but when your interest in being with them lags, 
make a polite excuse and withdraw. You have no right to re-
main while your mind is absent. 
Be genuinely amiable when you are with others. Never be 
a "sourpuss."  You don't have to laugh boisterously,  like a 
hyena, but don't wear a long face either. Just be smiling, con-
genial, and kind. Smiling on the outside when you are angry or 
resentful inside, however, is hypocrisy. If you want to be lik-
able, be sincere. Sincerity is a soul quality that God has given 
to every human being, but not all express it. Above all, be 
humble. Though you may have admirable inner strength, don't 
overwhelm others with your strong nature. Be calm and con-
siderate of them. This is the way to develop likable magnetism. 
Strive always to be understanding. Some people choose to 
be quarrelsome and to misunderstand us no matter what we 
say or do. They go about with a chip on their shoulder. To draw 

HOW TO BE MORE  LIKABLE  143 
real friends, one must cultivate understanding. True friends un-
derstand one another no matter what they do. You should be 
like that. 
What  is life unless you have the right kind of  friends 
around you? There is a magnet in your heart that will attract 
true friends. That magnet is unselfishness, thinking of others 
first. Very few persons are free from self-centeredness. Yet one 
can develop the quality of unselfishness very easily if he prac-
tises thinking of others first. A mother usually has this qual-
ity. Her life is service. She gives to her husband and children 
first. Because she always thinks of others before herself, others 
think of her. That is the tradition in the homes in India. We are 
taught the same spirit in the ashrams of real spiritual teachers. 
Consideration for others is a most wonderful quality. It is 
the greatest attractiveness you can have. Practise it! If some-
one is thirsty, a thoughtful person anticipates his need and of-
fers him a drink. Consideration means awareness of and atten-
tiveness to others. A considerate person, when in the company 
of others, will have an intuitive awareness of their needs. 
Live for Others and They Will Live for You 
There are those who would say, "I am a devout man." Yet 
if someone else sat in their church pew they would be ready to 
take off the intruder's head! Once in a while I see this sort of 
incident in my classes. If another person wants your seat, give 
it, even though you must stand. By your exemplary behaviour 
you will  have someone else thinking  considerately  of you 
every day. When you learn to live for others, they will live for 
you. When you live for yourself, no one is interested in you. 
You can best attract others by your good actions. 
If you look around, when you attend a party, you will al-
most always notice some guests who are openly envious of 
what others have. No one wants to be with thoughtless, self-
ish people. But everyone is glad to be with a tactful, consider-
ate person. 
Practise consideration in your speech as well as in your ac-
tions; and when you feel tempted to speak harshly, control that 
impulse and talk calmly instead. Let no one hear harsh words 
from you. Be not afraid to speak truth when you are asked to 

144  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
do so; but do not force your thoughts on others.  Remember 
also, it may be truth to speak of the blind man as a blind man, 
or the sick man as a sick man, but it is better to avoid such 
bluntness. By the kindness and consideration of your speech 
you help to uplift others and make them better. 
It isn't always your words that others listen to, however, 
but the strength and sincerity behind them. When a sincere 
man speaks, the world moves. When he says something, oth-
ers listen. Some persons talk on and on, hoping to convince the 
hearer by the steady barrage of words. But the captive listener 
is only thinking, "Please let me go!" When you talk, don't talk 
too much about yourself. Try to speak on a subject that inter-
ests the other person. And listen. That is the way to be attrac-
tive. You will see how your presence is in demand. 
My mother was considerate in that way. Fathers and moth-
ers should never talk against one another to the children. They 
should keep their troubles completely to themselves. My par-
ents had that self-control; they were really like gods. Only once 
did I see trouble between my father and mother. All that we 
children knew was that a carriage was at the door and our 
mother was going away. Uncle  came in and asked  Father, 
"What is the matter?" Father said, "I have no objection to her 
spending money for her charities,-1 only ask that she not spend 
beyond my income." Uncle whispered something in Father's 
ear. After a few conciliatory words from Father, Mother sent 
the carriage away. She never said a word against Father. She 
was always thinking of others. 
It is a joy to live for others. When I am alone I have hardly 
any impulse to eat, but when I am with others I like to fix ap-
petizing dishes for them. I saw that same characteristic in my 
guru, Swami Sri Yukteswarji. During my first visits to his 
ashram, I gained the impression that he always had savoury 
food to eat. But once I went there when he didn't expect me, 
and I saw he was having the plainest meal imaginable. I ques-
tioned him about it. "I don't have special dishes except when 
you come," he replied. "I like to prepare them for you." 
Once a fellow college student accompanied me to the mar-
ket to buy some pineapples. There were only two,- one was 
larger than the other. I bought both of them and handed the 

HOW TO BE MORE  LIKABLE  145 
large one to my friend. He was so surprised! He thought I had 
intended to keep that one for myself. A wonderful feeling arises 
within a person when he is considerate of others, thinking first 
of them. As soon as you are concerned for someone else, not 
only does he think of you, but God thinks of you too. If you are 
thoughtful, doing for others all the time, then even if you part 
with your last penny to help them, God will return even more 
blessings to you. 
Another thing to remember: Each one of you has some spe-
cial quality, a uniqueness, that others have not. Also, each one 
is richer or poorer in some way than others are. If you are un-
selfish, good-tempered,  understanding,  you are richer  than 
those who are selfish and angry and jealous. 
Perfect Balance Is the Altar of God 
Mankind is like a large zoo—so many people behaving so 
differently, most of them having no real control over them-
selves. But before one can realize the true Goal of life, he has 
to have that self-control. He must seek balance. Perfect bal-
ance is the altar of God. Strive for this,- and once you have at-
tained it, never lose it. Christ did not lose it when he was be-
ing nailed to the cross. He said, "Father, forgive them, for they 
know not what they do." The ordinary person cannot bear his 
tests. 
When I started on the spiritual path I supposed that only 
good would happen to me; but I found that many difficult ex-
periences also came. Then I reasoned: "Because I love God so 
deeply, I have expected too much from Him. From now on I 
will say, 'Lord, let Thy will be done.'"Severe trials came But I 
held to the thought, "Let Thy will be done." I wanted to accept 
whatever He sent my way. And He always showed me how to 
be victorious in every test. 
Even death is nothing to the spiritually  strong. I once 
dreamed I was dying. Nevertheless I was praying to Him: "Lord 
it is all right; whatever is Thy will." Then He touched me and 
I realized the truth: "How can I die? The wave cannot die,- it 
sinks back into the ocean and comes forth again. The wave 
never dies; and I can never die." 
When you go to a clothing store, you try to find a garment 

146  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
that is suited to you, that brings out the best in you. You 
should do the same for your soul. The soul has no particular 
apparel; it can don any style it wants to. The body is limited, 
but the soul can put on any kind of mental dress, any kind of 
personality. 
If you think deeply about any person, study his history, 
and consciously imitate his personality, you will begin to be 
like him,- you will establish your identity with that personal-
ity. I have practised this, and I can take on any personality I 
wish. When I put on the personality of wisdom I can talk of 
nothing but wisdom. When I adopt the personality of Sri Chai-
tanya, * a great devoted of God, I can speak of nothing but de-
votion. And when I attune myself to the personality of Jesus, I 
cannot speak of God as Mother—only as the Father, as he did. 
The soul can adopt any mental  dress it admires or desires, and 
change that dress as often as it pleases. 
When you meet a wonderful person, don't you wish you 
were like him? Think of all the noble qualities that are in the 
hearts of great men and women; you can have them all in your 
own heart. You can be humble and strong, or brave like a gen-
eral fighting for a righteous cause. You can have the conquer-
ing will of Genghis Khan or the divine will and love and sur-
render of St. Francis. 
Seek God, and Be Victorious in Life 
Above all, develop the will to seek God, no matter what 
the obstacles. Then you will be victorious in life. When I am 
trying to do something for the work, and many trials come, I 
sometimes think: "Why should I have to go through this? I 
have found God. I don't need these things for myself."+  But 
then I tell Him: "I will accept whatever comes to me. I care not 
* Sri Chaitanya's fame as a bhakta (devotee of God) spread throughout India in 
the 16th centruy. When in Gaya, in 1508, he had a spiritual awakening and be-
came inflamed with love for God, whom he worshiped as the avatar Lord Kr-
ishna. 
t In the Bhagavad Gita, 111:1, the devotee Arjuna similarly lamented to the 
Lord: "If thou dost consider understanding [realization of truth] to be superior 
to action, why then dost thou enjoin on me this awful activity?" And when 
facing his test on the cross, Jesus cried to God: "If it be possible, let this cup 
pass from me: nevertheless not as I will, but as Thou wilt" (Matthew 26:39). 

HOW TO BE MORE  LIKABLE  147 
what people think of me, because one day they are with me, 
the next day they are against me. Your pleasure is my pleasure. 
Your assurance is my assurance." 
Emulate  the  consciousness  of  the  great  ones  such  as 
Christ. Realize his omnipresence. The Father gave Jesus that 
universal consciousness by which he knows all things. Even as 
I am talking, he knows what I am saying. Though you don't see 
him, I see him. He is right here—a great light,  transforming 
this temple. Everyone here is within that light which I see. We 
are like waves in the ocean of that light—the light of Christ 
Consciousness [Kutastha Chaitanya],  the light of God. When 
you see His light and His presence, then you know that this life 
is nothing more than a test that everyone must go through to 
reach God. If Satan's tests are conquered, then even Satan be-
comes the tool of God. Every trial is a blessing if it brings us 
nearer to God. This is what you should remember. And what-
ever you do on earth, do it for God. 
Each human being is unique; no two can be exactly  the 
same. Think of yourself in this way: "My personality is the gift 
of God. What I am, no one else is. I shall be very proud of my 
divine individuality. I shall improve myself and don a person-
ality of goodness." If you play your part well, you are just as 
good as the soul who plays the part of a king or a queen. And 
so long as you play your role well, you will be attractive and 
loved by all. Your part well played is your passport to God. 
Abraham Lincoln was an accomplished actor on this stage 
of life. He was not afraid to play his difficult role. He was work-
ing for God and for what he believed to be right: the equality 
of man. That is why he is remembered and loved today. If you 
strive to serve God, you have served everyone. Seek to please 
Him, not man. 
What you expect others to be, you be first. Practise these 
suggestions. Take one quality at a time and work at develop-
ing it. From today, for instance, practise peace. Then  take-
cheerfulness,• try to smile even when you are unhappy. Then 
work at cultivating courage and fearlessness. Some persons are 
terrified of the dark. If you are one of these, practise going into 
a dark room until you get over this fear. Develop the  con-
sciousness that God is with you. You can be in an impregnable 

148  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
castle and still disease can get at you there. Yet you can be on 
the battlefield with bullets flying all around you, and if your 
time to leave the body has not come, nothing will hurt you. 
Practise perfecting sincerity, unselfishness, business ability, 
and so on. Work at it like the strong-minded martyr who never 
compromises his ideals. No matter what comes, do not let it 
bother or deter you. Be like that. 
Practise consideration and goodness until you are like a 
beautiful flower that everyone loves to see. Be the beauty that 
is in a flower, and the attractiveness that is in a pure mind. 
When you are attractive in that way, you will always have true 
friends. You will be loved by both man and God. 

Developing  Personality 
Self-Realization Fellowship International Headquarters, 
Los Angeles, California, October 28, 1938 
Personality and its development are generally considered 
only in the light of realizing some material goal, such as in-
creasing one's business or social opportunities. The real nature 
of personality is rarely analysed. 
What, essentially, is personality? It is the ego conscious-
ness,- not ego in the sense of inflated pride, but as the  con-
sciousness of existence. Each one of us knows: "I exist." 
Further, we are conscious of existing in a certain way, as a 
man or a woman, and with certain characteristic qualities. We 
think about ourselves in terms of our individual background, 
experiences, and environment. A housekeeper thinks of herself 
as a housekeeper, a lecturer thinks of himself as a lecturer, a 
scientist thinks of himself as a scientist. Yet when they are 
asleep they forget their daytime activities. In sleep the con-
sciousness of existence remains, though the egoistic concept of 
the wakeful personality may fade away entirely. But as soon as 
one awakens he remembers and becomes reassociated with his 
environmental identity. Therefore the personality a man dis-
plays in his wakeful hours is merely a cultivated and partial in-
dividuality. 
The consciousness of existence is fundamentally a univer-
sal, unlimited state; but it becomes more or less bound by the 
personality traits that we hold to from day to day. Eventually 
we forget that our individual qualities can be expanded or con-
tracted, according to our behaviour. 
Whence does our true personality derive? It comes from 
God. He is Absolute Consciousness, Absolute Existence, and 
Absolute Bliss. The Creator knows that He exists;  He also 
149 

150  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
knows that His existence is eternal, and that His nature is 
evernew Bliss. 
With the human mind we cannot know the Infinite Mind 
or perceive what ineffable Spirit is,- but through the supercon-
sciousness  of the soul we can taste the Divine Presence as 
Bliss. The joy we receive from any experience flows from God, 
even though it may have been roused by some outward cir-
cumstance. 
By concentrating within, you can directly feel the divine 
bliss of your soul within and also without. If you can stabilize 
yourself in that consciousness, your outer personality will de-
velop and become attractive to all beings. The soul is made in 
God's image, and when we become established in soul aware-
ness, our personality begins to reflect His goodness and beauty. 
That is your real personality. Any other characteristics you dis-
play are more or less a graft—they are not the real "you." The 
divine man, living in the cosmic consciousness of God, can as-
sume any kind of outer personality he wishes. 
When I am conscious of my human personality I have lim-
itations, but as soon as I change my consciousness to the soul 
sphere I see everything just as if it were a motion picture. A 
person concentrating on the beam by which images are shown 
on a movie screen can see that all those figures are scintillat-
ing by the current of light emanating from the projector. In the 
same way, I see the world and all its creatures solely as pro-
jected thoughts of God. Concentrate on matter and you see 
everything in terms of matter. But as soon as you lift up your 
consciousness to the state of divine awareness, you see the 
oceanic current of God's light flowing behind all matter. You 
see everything in terms of Spirit. 
Though  the unity  of God is reflected in  everything,  it 
appears diversified in cosmic nature. His creative life flows 
throughout the earth; put a seed in the ground and it begins to 
grow. Metals express a certain power and beauty of God. In the 
vegetable  kingdom  He  changes  His  personality  again;  the 
active expression of life is more visible in plants. Still, a study 
of creation reveals that every metal, every plant, every animal 
has a distinctive personality,- and in man we find an even more 
expanded individuality, for man knows that he is a living, con-

DEVELOPING  PERSONALITY  151 
scious being. But all these different personalities have been 
borrowed from God; He is the only Life. "O Arjuna! I am the 
Self in the heart of all creatures: I am their Origin, Existence, 
and Finality." Thus the Lord describes Himself in the Gita.* 
And in the Bible we read this declaration: "I am Alpha and 
Omega, the beginning and the ending, saith the Lord, which is 
and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty."! 
Intuition Develops One's True Personality 
Our soul intuition is a faculty of God. He has no mouth, 
yet He tastes everything. He has no hands or feet, yet He feels 
the whole universe. How? By intuition, by His omnipresence. 
Man ordinarily relies upon his senses to supply him with 
information about himself and the world in which he lives. His 
mind doesn't know anything except what his five senses tell 
him. But the superman relies upon intuition, his "sixth sense," 
for knowledge. Intuition doesn't depend on the senses or the 
power of inference for its data. For example, you feel certain 
that something is going to happen, and it does happen, exactly 
as you foresaw it. Each one of you has probably had some such 
experience. How did you know without any inferential or sense 
data? That direct knowing is the soul's power of intuition. 
The ancient Indian sage Patanjali tells us that scriptural 
authority is not in itself proof of truth. How then can you 
know that the Bible and the Gita are true? The data relayed by 
the senses and the power of inference cannot give final proof. 
Truth is ultimately understood or "proved" solely by intuition, 
soul realization. 
Your true personality begins to develop when you are 
able, by deep intuition, to feel that you are not this solid body 
but are the divine eternal current of Life and Consciousness 
within the body. That is how Jesus could walk on the water. 
He realized that everything is composed of the consciousness 
of God. 
Human personality can be changed to divine personality. 
Banish the consciousness that you are a bundle of flesh and 
bones. Every night God makes you forget that delusion. But as 
* Bhagavad Gita X:20.  t Revelation  1:8. 

152  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
soon as you wake up you are back again in the seeming con-
finements of the body. 
Man Can Be Whatever He Wants to Be 
Man can change his outer and inner nature by concentra-
tion. A person of strong mind can be whatever he wants to be. 
The limited human personality can be greatly expanded by 
meditation. When you close your eyes and feel the vastness of 
the soul within you, and when you can make that conscious-
ness enduring, then you will have the personality that God in-
tended you should have. The experience of the wakeful state 
has become predominant in your consciousness. But at the 
time of deep sleep, when man is granted freedom from the lim-
itations of the flesh, you are in touch with Truth, with your 
real personality. Your attitude changes with the subconscious 
and superconscious realization: "I am infinite. I am a part of 
everything." 
As your consciousness expands with divine understanding, 
your personality becomes increasingly attractive and powerful. 
When your character grows in a spiritual way, you can assume 
almost any shade of personality you desire. Mind is illimitable,-
and as you develop spiritually and your inner life becomes sep-
arate from body consciousness, you no longer feel any egoistic 
attachment to the flesh; you are aware of ineffable freedom. 
You shouldn't identify yourself as any particular type of in-
dividual. Rather be able to change your personality whenever 
you want to. I have done many different things in my life, just 
for the fun of it. I have invested money, I have done the work 
of a musician, of a contractor, of a cook. Truly, you can ac-
complish anything if you do not accept limitations by identi-
fying yourself with your present personality. When you say to 
me that you can't do this or that, I don't believe it. Whatever 
you make up your mind to do, you can do. God is the sum to-
tal of everything, and His image is within you. He can do any-
thing, and so can you, if you learn to identify yourself with His 
inexhaustible nature. 
No matter if you have health and wealth and everything 
else you want of the world, still there will always be some dis-

DEVELOPING  PERSONALITY  153 
illusion that will bring grief. Nothing of the earth is lasting; 
only God is lasting. When you develop the individuality that is 
an expression of His presence within you, which is your true 
Self, you will be able to attract anything you want. Any other 
personality you try to develop—whether that of an artist or a 
businessman or a writer—will bring disenchantment in its 
wake, because all human expressions have their limitations. 
You may go after success or money or fame, and achieve it; but 
always some flaw—lack of health or insufficient love or some-
thing else—will hurt you. The best course is to pray: "Lord, 
make me happy with awareness of Thee. Give me freedom 
from all earthly desires, and above all give me Thy joy that out-
lasts all the happy and sad experiences of life." 
Never Forget Your True Nature! 
Remember that as a child of God you are endowed with 
greater strength than you will ever need to overcome all the tri-
als that God may send you. 
Often we continue to suffer without making an effort to 
change; that is why we don't find lasting peace and content-
ment. If we would persevere we would certainly be able to con-
quer all difficulties. We must make the effort, that we may go 
from misery to happiness, from despondency to courage. 
It is necessary first to feel the importance of changing our 
condition. This attitude stimulates our will to action. Let us 
resolve that we will always make an effort to improve our Self-
knowledge and thus continuously better our existence. 
India's spiritual scientists explored the kingdom of the 
soul. They have given to mankind for its benefit certain uni-
versal laws of meditation by which real seekers—those who 
wish to find a good life by changing themselves—may scien-
tifically control their minds and attain Self-realization. 
When you develop your divine nature you become com-
pletely detached about the body; you no longer feel identified 
with it. You look after it as you would attend to a little child. 
As you realize your true Self more and more, by meditation, 
you become freed from mental and physical pains. You cast off 
your lifelong limitations. That is the best way to live out your 
days on earth. 

154  MAN'S ETERNAL  QUEST 
Awaken your Divine Personality 
Remember that it is not harmful to own things, but it is 
harmful to be owned by them. It is difficult to have the right 
balance. Struggling too hard for money, you may neglect your 
health. You will find that everything will betray you if you be-
tray your loyalty to God. So let not one drop of oil fall from the 
lamp of your attention in the sanctuary of inner silence as you 
meditate each day, and as you carefully perform your duties in 
the world.* That is the personality you want to develop—du-
tiful in carrying out your obligations in life, but aware that 
your real Home lies within. What is the use of developing a 
personality based on worldly values, which are ever changeful 
and fleeting? Rather strive for a personality that is derived from 
your living in the continuous consciousness of God. Bhagavan 
Krishna said: "When a man completely relinquishes all desires 
of the mind, and is entirely contented in the Self, by the Self, 
he is then considered to be one settled in wisdom."t 
Awaken that meek yet thunderous divine personality— 
strong as the lion, gentle as the dove. When you make up your 
mind that you will meditate and follow this path, nothing will 
be able to take you away from it. Perform your worldly tasks 
faithfully, without forgetting for a moment your highest duty, 
to God. 
* A story oft-related in India tells of the spiritual test given by the great saint, 
King Janaka, to his would-be disciple, Sukadeva. To test the young devotee 
before accepting him for spiritual training, Janaka required Sukadeva to tour 
the royal palace while carrying in the palm of his hand an oil lamp filled to 
the brim. The condition of passing the test was that sukadeva was to observe 
minutely (and subsequently report to the king) every item and detail in each 
palatial room, without spilling one drop of oil from the brimful lamp. The 
meaning of the test is that the spiritual aspirant must learn to keep his 
attention centered in Cod, not allowing his thoughts to wander from Him for 
a moment, lest the oil of divine communion be spilled, while at the same 
time he performs accurately to the last detail his duties in the world, 
t Bhagavad Gita 11:55. 

